
   Terry Pratchett
   Mort
   This is the bright candlelit room where the life-timers are stored– shelf upon shelf of them, squat hourglasses, one for every living person, pouring their fine sand from the future into the past. The accumulated hiss of the falling grains makes the room roar like the sea.
   This is the owner of the room, stalking through it with a preoccupied air. His name is Death.
   But not any Death. This is the Death whose particular sphere of operations is, well, not a sphere at all, but the Discworld, which is flat and rides on the back of four giant elephants who stand on the shell of the enormous star turtle Great A'Tuin, and which is bounded by a waterfall that cascades endlessly into space.
   Scientists have calculated that the chance of anything so patently absurd actually existing are millions to one.
   But magicians have calculated that million-to-one chances crop up nine times out of ten.
   Death clicks across the black and white tiled floor on toes of bone, muttering inside his cowl as his skeletal fingers count along the rows of busy hourglasses.
   Finally he finds one that seems to satisfy him, lifts it carefully from its shelf and carries it across to the nearest candle. He holds it so that the light glints off it, and stares at the little point of reflected brilliance.
   The steady gaze from those twinkling eye-sockets encompasses the world turtle, sculling through the deeps of space, carapace scarred by comets and pitted by meteors. One day even Great A'Tuin will die, Death knows; now, thatwould be a challenge.
   But the focus of his gaze dives onwards towards the blue-green magnificence of the Disc itself, turning slowly under its tiny orbiting sun.
   Now it curves away towards the great mountain range called the Ramtops. The Ramtops are full of deep valleys and unexpected crags and considerably more geography than they know what to do with. They have their own peculiar weather, full of shrapnel rain and whiplash winds and permanent thunder-storms. Some people say it's all because the Ramtops are the home of old, wild magic. Mind you, some people will say anything.
   Death blinks, adjusts for depth of vision. Now he sees the grassy country on the turnwise slopes of the mountains.
   Now he sees a particular hillside.
   Now he sees a field.
   Now he sees a boy, running.
   Now he watches.
   Now, in a voice like lead slabs being dropped on granite, he says: YES.

   There was no doubt that there was something magical in the soil of that hilly, broken area which– because of the strange tint that it gave to the local flora – was known as the octarine grass country. For example, it was one of the few places on the Disc where plants produced reannual varieties.
   Reannuals are plants that grow backwards in time. You sow the seed this year and they grow last year.
   Mort's family specialized in distilling the wine from reannual grapes. These were very powerful and much sought after by fortune-tellers, since of course they enabled them to see the future. The only snag was that you got the hangover the morningbefore, and had to drink a lot to get over it.
   Reannual growers tended to be big, serious men, much given to introspection and close examination of the calendar. A farmer who neglects to sow ordinary seeds only loses the crop, whereas anyone who forgets to sow seeds of a crop that has already been harvested twelve months before risks disturbing the entire fabric of causality, not to mention acute embarrassment.
   It was also acutely embarrassing to Mort's family that the youngest son was not at all serious and had about the same talent for horticulture that you would find in a dead starfish. It wasn't that he was unhelpful, but he had the land of vague, cheerful helpfulness that serious men soon learn to dread. There was something infectious, possibly even fatal, about it. He was tall, red-haired and freckled, with the sort of body that seems to be only marginally under its owner's control; it appeared to have been built out of knees.
   On this particular day it was hurtling across the high fields, waving its hands and yelling.
   Mort's father and uncle watched it disconsolately from the stone wall.
   'What I don't understand,' said father Lezek, 'is that the birds don't even fly away. I'd fly away, if I saw it coining towards me.'
   'Ah. The human body's a wonderful thing. I mean, his legs go all over the place but there's a fair turn of speed there.'
   Mort reached the end of a furrow. An overfull woodpigeon lurched slowly out of his way.
   'His heart's in the right place, mind,' said Lezek, carefully.
   'Ah. 'Course, 'tis the rest of him that isn't.'
   'He's clean about the house. Doesn't eat much,' said Lezek.
   'No, I can see that.'
   Lezek looked sideways at his brother, who was staring fixedly at the sky.
   'I did hear you'd got a place going up at your farm, Hamesh,' he said.
   'Ah. Got an apprentice in, didn't I?'
   'Ah,' said Lezek gloomily, 'when was that, then?'
   'Yesterday,' said his brother, lying with rattlesnake speed. 'All signed and sealed. Sorry. Look, I got nothing against young Mort, see, he's as nice a boy as you could wish to meet, it's just that—'
   'I know, I know,' said Lezek. 'He couldn't find his arse with both hands.'
   They stared at the distant figure. It had fallen over. Some pigeons had waddled over to inspect it.
   'He's not stupid, mind,' said Hamesh. 'Not what you'd call stupid.'
   'There's a brain there all right,' Lezek conceded. 'Sometimes he starts thinking so hard you has to hit him round the head to get his attention. His granny taught him to read, see. I reckon it overheated his mind.'
   Mort had got up and tripped over his robe.
   'You ought to set him to a trade,' said Hamesh, reflectively. 'The priesthood, maybe. Or wizardry. They do a lot of reading, wizards.'
   They looked at each other. Into both their minds stole an inkling of what Mort might be capable of if he got his well-meaning hands on a book of magic.
   'All right,' said Hamesh hurriedly. 'Something else, then. There must be lots of things he could turn his hand to.'
   'He starts thinking too much, that's the trouble,' said Lezek. 'Look at him now. You don't think about how to scare birds, you just does it. A normal boy, I mean.'
   Hamesh scratched his chin thoughtfully.
   'It could be someone else's problem,' he said.
   Lezek's expression did not alter, but there was a subtle change around his eyes.
   'How do you mean?' he said.
   'There's the hiring fair at Sheepridge next week. You set him as a 'prentice, see, and his new master'll have the job of knocking him into shape. 'Tis the law. Get him indentured, and 'tis binding.'
   Lezek looked across the field at his son, who was examining a rock.
   'I wouldn't want anything to happen to him, mind,' he said doubtfully. 'We're quite fond of him, his mother and me. You get used to people.'
   'It'd be for his own good, you'll see. Make a man of him.'
   'Ah. Well. There's certainly plenty of raw material,' sighed Lezek.
   Mort was getting interested in the rock. It had curly shells in it, relics of the early days of the world when the Creator had made creatures out of stone, no-one knew why.
   Mort was interested in lots of things. Why people's teeth fitted together so neatly, for example. He'd given that one a lot of thought. Then there was the puzzle of why the sun came out during the day, instead of at night when the light would come in useful. He knew the standard explanation, which somehow didn't seem satisfying.
   In short, Mort was one of those people who are more dangerous than a bag full of rattlesnakes. He was determined to discover the underlying logic behind the universe.
   Which was going to be hard, because there wasn't one. The Creator had a lot of remarkably good ideas when he put the world together, but making it understandable hadn't been one of them.
   Tragic heroes always moan when the gods take an interest in them, but it's the people the gods ignore who get the really tough deals.
   His father was yelling at him, as usual. Mort threw the rock at a pigeon, which was almost too full to lurch out of the way, and wandered back across the field.

   And that was why Mort and his father walked down through the mountains into Sheepridge on Hogswatch Eve, with Mort's rather sparse possessions in a sack on the back of a donkey. The town wasn't much more than four sides to a cobbled square, lined with shops that provided all the service industry of the farming community.
   After five minutes Mort came out of the tailors wearing a loose fitting brown garment of imprecise function, which had been understandably unclaimed by a previous owner and had plenty of room for him to grow, on the assumption that he would grow into a nineteen-legged elephant.
   His father regarded him critically.
   'Very nice,' he said, 'for the money.'
   'It itches,' said Mort. 'I think there'sthings in here with me.'
   There's thousands of lads in the world'd be very thankful for a nice warm—' Lezek paused, and gave up – 'garment like that, my lad.'
   'I could share it with them?' Mort said hopefully.
   'You've got to look smart,' said Lezek severely. 'You've got to make an impression, stand out in the crowd.'
   There was no doubt about it. He would. They set out among the throng crowding the square, each listening to his own thoughts. Usually Mort enjoyed visiting the town, with its cosmopolitan atmosphere and strange dialects from villages as far away as five, even ten miles, but this time he felt unpleasantly apprehensive, as if he could remember something that hadn't happened yet.
   The fair seemed to work like this: men looking for work stood in ragged lines in the centre of the square. Many of them sported little symbols in their hats to tell the world the kind of work they were trained in– shepherds wore a wisp of wool, carters a hank of horsehair, interior decorators a strip of rather interesting hessian wallcovering, and so on.
   The boys seeking apprenticeships were clustered on the Hub side of the square.
   'You just go and stand there, and someone comes and offers you an apprenticeship,' said Lezek, his voice trimmed with uncertainty. 'If they like the look of you, that is.'
   'How do they do that?' said Mort.
   'Well,' said Lezek, and paused. Hamesh hadn't explained about this bit. He drew on his limited knowledge of the marketplace, which was restricted to livestock sales, and ventured, 'I suppose they count your teeth and that. And make sure you don't wheeze and your feet are all right. I shouldn't let on about the reading, it unsettles people.'
   'And then what?' said Mort.
   'Then you go and learn a trade,' said Lezek.
   'What trade in particular?'
   'Well ... carpentry is a good one,' Lezek hazarded. 'Or thievery. Someone's got to do it.'
   Mort looked at his feet. He was a dutiful son, when he remembered, and if being an apprentice was what was expected of him then he was determined to be a good one. Carpentry didn't sound very promising, though– wood had a stubborn life of its own, and a tendency to split. And official thieves were rare in the Ramtops, where people weren't rich enough to afford them.
   'All right,' he said eventually, 'I'll go and give it a try. But what happens if I don't get prenticed?'
   Lezek scratched his head.
   'I don't know,' he said. 'I expect you just wait until the end of the fair. At midnight. I suppose.'

   And now midnight approached.
   A light frost began to crisp the cobblestones. In the ornamental clock tower that overlooked the square a couple of delicately-carved little automatons whirred out of trapdoors in the clockface and struck the quarter hour.
   Fifteen minutes to midnight. Mort shivered, but the crimson fires of shame and stubbornness flared up inside him, hotter than the slopes of Hell. He blew on his fingers for something to do and stared up at the freezing sky, trying to avoid the stares of the few stragglers among what remained of the fair.
   Most of the stall keepers had packed up and gone. Even the hot meat pie man had stopped crying his wares and, with no regard for personal safety, was eating one.
   The last of Mort's fellow hopefuls had vanished hours ago. He was a wall-eyed young man with a stoop and a running nose, and Sheepridge's one licensed beggar had pronounced him to be ideal material. The lad on the other side of Mort had gone off to be a toy maker. One by one they had trooped off– the masons, the farriers, the assassins, the mercers, coopers, hoodwinkers and ploughmen. In a few minutes it would be the new year and a hundred boys would be starting out hopefully on their careers, new worthwhile lives of useful service rolling out in front of them.
   Mort wondered miserably why he hadn't been picked. He'd tried to look respectable, and had looked all prospective masters squarely in the eye to impress them with his excellent nature and extremely likeable qualities. This didn't seem to have the right effect.
   'Would you like a hot meat pie?' said his father.
   'No.'
   'He's selling them cheap.'
   'No. Thank you.'
   'Oh.'
   Lezek hesitated.
   'I could ask the man if he wants an apprentice,' he said, helpfully. 'Very reliable, the catering trade.'
   'I don't think he does,' said Mort.
   'No, probably not,' said Lezek. 'Bit of a one-man business, I expect. He's gone now, anyway. Tell you what, I'll save you a bit of mine.'
   'I don't actually feel very hungry, dad.'
   'There's hardly any gristle.'
   'No. But thanks all the same.'
   'Oh.' Lezek deflated a little. He danced about a bit to stamp some life back into his feet, and whistled a few tuneless bars between his teeth. He felt he ought to say something, to offer some kind of advice, to point out that life had its ups and downs, to put his arm around his son's shoulder and talk expansively about the problems of growing up, to indicate– in short – that the world is a funny old lace where one should never, metaphorically speaking, be so proud as to turn down the offer of a perfectly good hot meat pie.
   They were alone now. The frost, the last one of the year, tightened its grip on the stones.
   High in the tower above them a cogged wheel wentclonk, tripped a lever, released a ratchet and let a heavy lead weight drop down. There was a dreadful metallic wheezing noise and the trapdoors in the clock face slid open, releasing the clockwork men. Swinging their hammers jerkily, as if they were afflicted with robotic arthritis, they began to ring in the new day.
   'Well, that's it,' said Lezek, hopefully. They'd have to find somewhere to sleep– Hogswatch-night was no time to be walking in the mountains. Perhaps there was a stable somewhere. . . .
   'It's not midnight until the last stroke,' said Mort, distantly.
   Lezek shrugged. The sheer strength of Mort's obstinacy was defeating him.
   'All right,' he said. 'We'll wait, then.'
   And then they heard the clip-clop of hooves, which boomed rather more loudly around the chilly square than common acoustics should really allow. In fact clip-clop was an astonishingly inaccurate word for the kind of noise which rattled around Mort's head; clip-clop suggested a rather jolly little pony, quite possibly wearing a straw hat with holes cut out for its ears. An edge tothis sound made it very clear that straw hats weren't an option.
   The horse entered the square by the Hub road, steam curling off its huge damp white flanks and sparks striking up from the cobbles beneath it. It trotted proudly, like a war charger. It was definitely not wearing a straw hat.
   The tall figure on its back was wrapped up against the cold. When the horse reached the centre of the square the rider dismounted, slowly, and fumbled with something behind the saddle. Eventually he– or she – produced a nosebag, fastened it over the horse's ears, and gave it a friendly pat on the neck.
   The air took on a thick, greasy feel, and the deep shadows around Mort became edged with blue and purple rainbows. The rider strode towards him, black cloak billowing and feet making little clicking sounds on the cobbles. They were the only noises– silence clamped down on the square like great drifts of cotton wool.
   The impressive effect was rather spoilt by a patch of ice.
   OH, BUGGER.
   It wasn't exactly a voice. The words were there all right, but they arrived in Mort's head without bothering to pass through his ears.
   He rushed forward to help the fallen figure, and found himself grabbing hold of a hand that was nothing more than polished bone, smooth and rather yellowed like an old billiard ball. The figure's hood fell back, and a naked skull turned its empty eyesockets towards him.
   Not quite empty, though. Deep within them, as though they were windows looking across the gulfs of space, were two tiny blue stars.
   It occurred to Mort that he ought to feel horrified, so he was slightly shocked to find that he wasn't. It was a skeleton sitting in front of him, rubbing its knees and grumbling, but it was a live one, curiously impressive but not, for some strange reason, very frightening.
   THANK YOU, BOY, said the skull.WHAT IS YOUR NAME?
   'Uh,' said Mort, 'Mortimer . . . sir. They call me Mort.'
   WHAT A COINCIDENCE, said the skull.HELP ME UP, PLEASE.
   The figure rose unsteadily, brushing itself down. Now Mort could see there was a heavy belt around its waist, from which was slung a white-handled sword.
   'I hope you are not hurt, sir,' he said politely.
   The skull grinned. Of course, Mort thought, it hasn't much of a choice.
   NO HARM DONE, I AM SURE. The skull looked around and seemed to see Lezek, who appeared to be frozen to the spot, for the first time. Mort thought an explanation was called for.
   'My father,' he said, trying to move protectively in front of Exhibit A without causing any offence. 'Excuse me, sir, but are you Death?'
   CORRECT. FULL MARKS FOR OBSERVATION, THAT BOY.
   Mort swallowed.
   'My father is a good man,' he said. He thought for a while, and added, 'Quite good. I'd rather you left him alone, if it's all the same to you. I don't know what you have done to him, but I'd like you to stop it. No offence meant.'
   Death stepped back, his skull on one side.
   I HAVE MERELY PUT US OUTSIDE TIME FOR A MOMENT, he said. HE WILL SEE AND HEAR NOTHING THAT DISTURBS HIM. NO, BOY, IT WAS YOU I CAME FOR.
   'Me?'
   YOU ARE HERE SEEKING EMPLOYMENT?
   Light dawned on Mort. 'You are looking for anapprentice?' he said.
   The eyesockets turned towards him, their actinic pinpoints flaring.
   OF COURSE.
   Death waved a bony hand. There was a wash of purple light, a sort of visible 'pop', and Lezek unfroze. Above his head the clockwork automatons got on with the job of proclaiming midnight, as Time was allowed to come creeping back.
   Lezek blinked.
   'Didn't see you there for a minute,' he said. 'Sorry– mind must have been elsewhere.'
   I WAS OFFERING YOUR BOY A POSITION, said Death.I TRUST THAT MEETS WITH YOUR APPROVAL?
   'What was your job again?' said Lezek, talking to a black-robed skeleton without showing even a flicker of surprise.
   I USHER SOULS INTO THE NEXT WORLD, said Death.
   'Ah,' said Lezek, 'of course, sorry, should have guessed from the clothes. Very necessary work, very steady. Established business?'
   I HAVE BEEN GOING FOR SOME TIME, YES, said Death.
   'Good. Good. Never really thought of it as a job for Mort, you know, but it's good work, good work, always very reliable. What's your name?'
   DEATH.
   'Dad—' said Mort urgently.
   'Can't say I recognize the firm,' said Lezek. 'Where are you based exactly?'
   FROM THE UTTERMOST DEPTHS OF THE SEA TO THE HEIGHTS WHERE EVEN THE EAGLE MAY NOT GO, said Death.
   'That's fair enough,' nodded Lezek. 'Well, I—'
   'Dad—' said Mort, pulling at his father's coat.
   Death laid a hand on Mort's shoulder.
   WHAT YOUR FATHER SEES AND HEARS IS NOT WHAT YOU SEE AND HEAR,he said. DO NOT WORRY HIM. DO YOU THINK HE WOULD WANT TO SEE ME– IN THE FLESH, AS IT WERE?
   'But you're Death,' said Mort. 'You go around killing people!'
   I? KILL? said Death, obviously offended.CERTAINLY NOT. PEOPLE GET KILLED, BUT THAT'S THEIR BUSINESS. I JUST TAKE OVER FROM THEN ON. AFTER ALL, IT'D BE A BLOODY STUPID WORLD IF PEOPLE GOT KILLED WITHOUT DYING, WOULDN'T IT?
   'Well, yes—' said Mort, doubtfully.
   Mort had never heard the word 'intrigued'. It was not in regular use in the family vocabulary. But a spark in his soul told him that here was something weird and fascinating and not entirely horrible, and that if he let this moment go he'd spend the rest of his life regretting it. And he remembered the humiliations of the day, and the long walk back home. . . .
   'Er,' he began, 'I don't have to die to get the job, do I?'
   BEING DEAD IS NOT COMPULSORY.
   'And ... the bones ...?'
   NOT IF YOU DON'T WANT TO.
   Mort breathed out again. It had been starting to prey on his mind.
   'If father says it's all right,' he said.
   They looked at Lezek, who was scratching his beard.
   'How do you feel about this, Mort?' he said, with the brittle brightness of a fever victim. 'It's not everyone's idea of an occupation. It's not what I had in mind, I admit. But they do say that undertaking is an honoured profession. It's your choice.'
   'Undertaking?' said Mort. Death nodded, and raised his finger to his lips in a conspiratorial gesture.
   'It's interesting,' said Mort slowly. 'I think I'd like to try it.'
   'Where did you say your business was?' said Lezek. 'Is it far?'
   NO FURTHER THAN THE THICKNESS OF A SHADOW, said Death.WHERE THE FIRST PRIMAL CELL WAS, THERE WAS I ALSO. WHERE MAN IS, THERE AM I. WHEN THE LAST LIFE CRAWLS UNDER FREEZING STARS, THERE WILL I BE.
   'Ah,' said Lezek, 'you get about a bit, then.' He looked puzzled, like a man struggling to remember something important, and then obviously gave up.
   Death patted him on the shoulder in a friendly fashion and turned to Mort.
   HAVE YOU ANY POSSESSIONS, BOY?
   'Yes,' said Mort, and then remembered. 'Only I think I left them in the shop. Dad, we left the sack in the clothes shop!'
   'It'll be shut,' said Lezek. 'Shops don't open on Hogswatch Day. You'll have to go back the day after tomorrow– well, tomorrow now.'
   IT IS OF LITTLE ACCOUNT, said Death.WE WILL LEAVE NOW. NO DOUBT I WILL HAVE BUSINESS HERE SOON ENOUGH.
   'I hope you'll be able to drop in and see us soon,' said Lezek. He seemed to be struggling with his thoughts.
   'I'm not sure that will be a good idea,' said Mort.
   'Well, goodbye, lad,' said Lezek. 'You're to do what you're told, you understand? And– excuse me, sir, do you have a son?'
   Death looked rather taken aback.
   NO, he said,I HAVE NO SONS.
   'I'll just have a last word with my boy, if you've no objection.'
   THEN I WILL GO AND SEE TO THE HORSE,said Death, with more than normal tact.
   Lezek put his arm around his son's shoulders, with some difficulty in view of their difference in height, and gently propelled him across the square.
   'Mort, you know your uncle Hemesh told me about this prenticing business?' he whispered.
   'Yes?'
   'Well, he told me something else,' the old man confided. 'He said it's not unknown for an apprentice to inherit his master's business. What do you think of that, then?'
   'Uh. I'm not sure,' said Mort.
   'It's worth thinking about,' said Lezek.
   'Iam thinking about it, father.'
   'Many a young lad has started out that way, Hemesh said. He makes himself useful, earns his master's confidence, and, well, if there's any daughters in the house . . . did Mr, er, Mr say anything about daughters?'
   'Mr who?' said Mort.
   'Mr . . . your new master.'
   'Oh. Him. No. No, I don't think so,' said Mort slowly. 'I don't think he's the marrying type.'
   'Many a keen young man owes his advancement to his nuptials,' said Lezek.
   'He does?'
   'Mort, I don't think you're really listening.'
   'What?'
   Lezek came to a halt on the frosty cobbles and spun the boy around to face him.
   'You're really going to have to do better than this,' he said. 'Don't you understand, boy? If you're going to amount to anything in this world then you've got tolisten. I'm your father telling you these things.'
   Mort looked down at his father's face. He wanted to say a lot of things: he wanted to say how much he loved him, how worried he was; he wanted to ask what his father really thought he'd just seen and heard. He wanted to say that he felt as though he stepped on a molehill and found that it was really a volcano. He wanted to ask what 'nuptials' meant.
   What he actually said was, 'Yes. Thank you. I'd better be going. I'll try and write you a letter.'
   'There's bound to be someone passing who can read it to us,' said Lezek. 'Goodbye, Mort.' He blew his nose.
   'Goodbye, dad. I'll come back to visit,' said Mort. Death coughed tactfully, although it sounded like the pistol-crack of an ancient beam full of death-watch beetle.
   WE HAD BETTER BE GOING, he said.HOP UP, MORT.
   As Mort scrambled behind the ornate silver saddle Death leaned down and shook Lezek's hand.
   THANK YOU, he said.
   'He's a good lad at heart,' said Lezek. 'A bit dreamy, that's all. I suppose we were all young once.'
   Death considered this.
   No, he said,I DON'T THINK SO.
   He gathered up the reins and turned the horse towards the Rim road. From his perch behind the black-robed figure Mort waved desperately.
   Lezek waved back. Then, as the horse and its two riders disappeared from view, he lowered his hand and looked at it. The handshake . . . it had felt strange. But, somehow, he couldn't remember exactly why.

   Mort listened to the clatter of stone under the horse's hooves. Then there was the soft thud of packed earth as they reached the road, and then there was nothing at all.
   He looked down and saw the landscape spread out below him, the night etched with moonlight silver. If he fell off, the only thing he'd hit was air.
   He redoubled his grip on the saddle.
   Then Death said,ARE YOU HUNGRY, BOY?
   'Yes, sir.' The words came straight from his stomach without the intervention of his brain.
   Death nodded, and reined in the horse. It stood on the air, the great circular panorama of the Disc glittering below it. Here and there a city was an range glow; in the warm seas nearer the Rim there was a hint of phosphorescence. In some of the deep valleys the trapped daylight of the Disc, which is slow and slightly heavy[1] was evaporating like silver steam.
   But it was outshone by the glow that rose towards the stars from the Rim itself. Vast streamers of light shimmered and glittered across the night. Great golden walls surrounded the world.
   'It's beautiful,' said Mort softly. 'What is it?'
   THE SUN is UNDER THE DISK, said Death.
   'Is it like this every night?'
   EVERY NIGHT, said Death.NATURE'S LIKE THAT.
   'Doesn't anyone know?'
   ME. You. THE GODS. GOOD, IS IT?
   'Gosh!'
   Death leaned over the saddle and looked down at the kingdoms of the world.
   I DON'T KNOW ABOUT YOU, he said,BUT I COULD MURDER A CURRY.
   Although it was well after midnight the twin city of Ankh-Morpork was roaring with life. Mort had thought Sheepridge looked busy, but compared to the turmoil of the street around him the town was, well, a morgue.
   Poets have tried to describe Ankh-Morpork. They have failed. Perhaps it's the sheer zestful vitality of the place, or maybe it's just that a city with a million inhabitants and no sewers is rather robust for poets, who prefer daffodils and no wonder. So let's just say that Ankh-Morpork is as full of life as an old cheese on a hot day, as loud as a curse in a cathedral, as bright as an oil slick, as colourful as a bruise and as full of activity, industry, bustle and sheer exuberant busyness as a dead dog on a termite mound.
   There were temples, their doors wide open, filling the streets with the sounds of gongs, cymbals and, in the case of some of the more conservative fundamentalist religions, the brief screams of the victims. There were shops whose strange wares spilled out on to the pavement. There seemed to be rather a lot of friendly young ladies who couldn't afford many clothes. There were flares, and jugglers, and assorted sellers of instant transcendence.
   And Death stalked through it all. Mort had half expected him to pass through the crowds like smoke, but it wasn't like that at all. The simple truth was that wherever Death walked, people just drifted out of the way.
   It didn't work like that for Mort. The crowds that gently parted for his new master closed again just in time to get in his way. His toes got trodden on, his ribs were bruised, people kept trying to sell him unpleasant spices and suggestively-shaped vegetables, and a rather elderly lady said, against all the evidence, that he looked a well set-up young lad who would like a nice tune.
   He thanked her very much, and said that he hoped he was having a nice tune already.
   Death reached the street corner, the light from the flares raising brilliant highlights on the polished dome of his skull, and sniffed the air. A drunk staggered up, and without quite realizing why made a slight detour in his erratic passage for no visible reason.THIS IS THE CITY, BOY, said Death.WHAT DO YOU THINK?
   'It's very big,' said Mort, uncertainly. 'I mean, why does everyone want to live all squeezed together like this?'
   Death shrugged.
   I LIKE IT, he said.IT'S FULL OF LIFE.
   'Sir?'
   YES?
   'What's a curry?'
   The blue fires flared deep in the eyes of Death.
   HAVE YOU EVER BITTEN A RED-HOT ICE CUBE?
   'No, sir,' said Mort.
   CURRY'S LIKE THAT.
   'Sir?'
   YES?
   Mort swallowed hard. 'Excuse me, sir, but my dad said, if I don't understand, I was to ask questions, sir?'
   VERY COMMENDABLE, said Death. He set off down a side street, the crowds parting in front of him like random molecules.
   'Well, sir, I can't help noticing, the point is, well, the plain fact of it, sir, is—'
   OUT WITH IT, BOY.
   'How can you eat things, sir?'
   Death pulled up short, so that Mort walked into him. When the boy started to speak he waved him into silence. He appeared to be listening to something.
   THERE ARE TIMES, YOU KNOW, he said, half to himself,WHEN I GET REALLY UPSET.
   He turned on one heel and set off down an alleyway at high speed, his cloak flying out behind him. The alley wound between dark walls and sleeping buildings, not so much a thoroughfare as a meandering gap.
   Death stopped by a decrepit water butt and plunged his arm in at full length, bringing out a small sack with a brick tied to it. He drew his sword, a line of flickering blue fire in the darkness, and sliced through the string.
   I GET VERY ANGRY INDEED, he said. He upended the sack and Mort watched the pathetic scraps of sodden fur slide out, to lie in their spreading puddle on the cobbles. Death reached out with his white fingers and stroked them gently.
   After a while something like grey smoke curled up from the kittens and formed three small cat-shaped clouds in the air. They billowed occasionally, unsure of their shape, and blinked at Mort with puzzled grey eyes. When he tried to touch one his hand went straight through it, and tingled.
   YOU DON'T SEE PEOPLE AT THEIR BEST IN THIS JOB, aid Death. He blew on a kitten, sending it gently tumbling. Its miaow of complaint sounded as though it had come from a long way away via a tin tube.
   They're souls, aren't they?' said Mort. 'What do people look like?'
   PEOPLE SHAPED, said Death.IT'S BASICALLY ALL OWN TO THE CHARACTERISTIC MORPHOGENETIC FIELD.
   He sighed like the swish of a shroud, picked the kittens out of the air, and carefully stowed them away somewhere in the dark recesses of his robe. He stood up.
   CURRY TIME, he said.

   It was crowded in theCurry Gardens on the corner of God Street and Blood Alley, but only with the cream of society– at least, with those people who are found floating on the top and who, therefore, it's wisest to call the cream. Fragrant bushes planted among the tables nearly concealed the basic smell of the city itself, which has been likened to the nasal equivalent of a foghorn.
   Mort ate ravenously, but curbed his curiosity and didn't watch to see how Death could possibly eat anything. The food was there to start with and wasn't there later, so presumably something must have happened in between. Mort got the feeling that Death wasn't really used to all this but was doing it to put him at his ease, like an elderly bachelor uncle who has been landed with his nephew for a holiday and is terrified of getting it wrong.
   The other diners didn't take much notice, even when Death leaned back and lit a rather fine pipe. Someone with smoke curling out of their eye sockets takes some ignoring, but everyone managed it.
   'Is it magic?' said Mort.
   WHAT DO YOU THINK? said Death. AM I REALLY HERE, BOY?
   'Yes,' said Mort slowly. 'I . . . I've watched people. They look at you but they don't see you, I think. You do something to their minds.'
   Death shook his head.
   THEY DO IT ALL THEMSELVES, he said.THERE'S NO MAGIC. PEOPLE CAN'T SEE ME, THEY SIMPLY WON'T ALLOW THEMSELVES TO DO IT. UNTIL IT'S TIME, OF COURSE. WIZARDS CAN SEE ME, AND CATS. BUT YOUR AVERAGE HUMAN . . . NO, NEVER.He blew a smoke ring at the sky, and added,STRANGE BUT TRUE.
   Mort watched the smoke ring wobble into the sky and drift away towards the river.
   'I can see you,' he said.
   THAT'S DIFFERENT.
   The Klatchian waiter arrived with the bill, and placed it in front of Death. The man was squat and brown, with a hairstyle like a coconut gone nova, and his round face creased into a puzzled frown when Death nodded politely to him. He shook his head like someone trying to dislodge soap from his ears, and walked away.
   Death reached into the depths of his robe and brought out a large leather bag full of assorted copper coinage, most of it blue and green with age. He inspected the bill carefully. Then he counted out a dozen coins.
   COME, he said, standing up. WE MUST GO.
   Mort trotted along behind him as he stalked out of the garden and into the street, which was still fairly busy even though there were the first suggestions of dawn on the horizon.
   'What are we going to do now?'
   BUY YOU SOME NEW CLOTHES.
   'These were new today– yesterday, I mean.
   ' REALLY?
   'Father said the shop was famous for its budget clothing,' said Mort, running to keep up.
   IT CERTAINLY ADDS A NEW TERROR TO POVERTY.
   They turned into a wider street leading into a more affluent part of the city (the torches were closer together and the middens further apart). There were no stalls and alley corner traders here, but proper buildings with signs hanging outside. They weren't mere shops, they were emporia; they had purveyors in them, and chairs, and spittoons. Most of them were open even at this time of night, because the average Ankhian trader can't sleep for thinking of the money he's not making.
   'Doesn't anyone ever go to bed around here?' said Mort.
   THIS IS A CITY, said Death, and pushed open the door of a clothing store. When they came out twenty minutes later Mort was wearing a neatly fitting black robe with faint silver embroidery, and the shopkeeper was looking at a handful of antique copper coins and wondering precisely how he came to have them.
   'How do you get all those coins?' asked Mort.
   IN PAIRS.
   An all-night barber sheared Mort's hair into the latest fashion among the city's young bloods while Death relaxed in the next chair, humming to himself. Much to his surprise, he felt in a good humour.
   In fact after a while he pushed his hood back and glanced up at the barber's apprentice, who tied a towel around his neck in that unseeing, hypnotised way that Mort was coming to recognize, and said,A SPLASH OF TOILET WATER AND A POLISH, MY GOOD MAN.
   An elderly wizard having a beard-trim on the other side stiffened when he heard those sombre, leaden tones and swung around. He blanched and muttered a few protective incantations after Death turned, very slowly for maximum effect, and treated him to a grin.
   A few minutes later, feeling rather self-conscious and chilly around the ears, Mort was heading back towards the stables where Death had lodged his horse. He tried an experimental swagger; he felt his new suit and haircut rather demanded it. It didn't quite work.

   Mort awoke.
   He lay looking at the ceiling while his memory did a fast-rewind and the events of the previous day crystallised in his mind like little ice cubes.
   He couldn't have met Death. He couldn't have eaten a meal with a skeleton with glowing blue eyes. It had to be a weird dream. He couldn't have ridden pillion on a great white horse that had cantered up into the sky and then went . . .
   . . . where?
   The answer flowed into his mind with all the inevitability of a tax demand.
   HERE.
   His searching hands reached up to his cropped hair, and down to sheets of some smooth slippery material. It was much finer than the wool he was used to at home, which was coarse and always smelled of sheep; it felt like warm, dry ice.
   He swung out of the bed hastily and stared around the room.
   First of all it was large, larger than the entire house back home, and dry, dry as old tombs under ancient deserts. The air tasted as though it had been cooked for hours and then allowed to cool. The carpet under his feet was deep enough to hide a tribe of pygmies and crackled electrically as he padded through it. And everything had been designed in shades of purple and black.
   He looked down at his own body, which was wearing a long white nightshirt. His clothes had been neatly folded on a chair by the bed; the chair, he couldn't help noticing, was delicately carved with a skull-and-bones motif.
   Mort sat down on the edge of the bed and began to dress, his mind racing.
   He eased open the heavy oak door, and felt oddly disappointed when it failed to creak ominously.
   There was a bare wooden corridor outside, with big yellow candles set in holders on the far wall. Mort crept out and sidled along the boards until he reached a staircase. He negotiated that successfully without anything ghastly happening, arriving in what looked like an entrance hall full of doors. There were a lot of funereal drapes here, and a grandfather clock with a tick like the heartbeat of a mountain. There was an umbrella stand beside it.
   It had a scythe in it.
   Mort looked around at the doors. They looked important. Their arches were carved in the now-familiar bones motif. He went to try the nearest one, and a voice behind him said:
   'You mustn't go in there, boy.'
   It took him a moment to realize that this wasn't a voice in his head, but real human words that had been formed by a mouth and transferred to his ears by a convenient system of air compression, as nature intended. Nature had gone to a lot of trouble for six words with a slightly petulant tone to them.
   He turned around. There was a girl there, about his own height and perhaps a few years older than him. She had silver hair, and eyes with a pearly sheen to them, and the kind of interesting but impractical long dress that tends to be worn by tragic heroines who clasp single roses to their bosom while gazing soulfully at the moon. Mort had never heard the phrase 'Pre-Raphaelite', which was a pity because it would have been almost the right description. However, such girls tend to be on the translucent, consumptive side, whereas this one had a slight suggestion of too many chocolates.
   She stared at him with her head on one side, and one foot tapping irritably on the floor. Then she reached out quickly and pinched him sharply on the arm.
   'Ow!'
   'Hmm. So you're really real,' she said. 'What's your name, boy?'
   'Mortimer. They call me Mort,' he said, rubbing his elbow. 'What did you do that for?'
   'I shall call you Boy,' she said. 'And I don't really have to explain myself, you understand, but if you must know I thought you were dead. Youlook dead.'
   Mort said nothing.
   'Lost your tongue?'
   Mort was, in fact, counting to ten.
   'I'm not dead,' he said eventually. 'At least, I don't think so. It's a little hard to tell. Who are you?'
   'You may call me Miss Ysabell,' she said haughtily. 'Father told me you must have something to eat. Follow me.'
   She swept away towards one of the other doors. Mort trailed behind her at just the right distance to have it swing back and hit his other elbow.
   There was a kitchen on the other side of the door– long, low and warm, with copper pans hanging from the ceiling and a vast black iron stove occupying the whole of one long wall. An old man was standing in front of it, frying eggs and bacon and whistling between his teeth.
   The smell attracted Mort's taste buds from across the room, hinting that if they got together they could really enjoy themselves. He found himself moving forward without even consulting his legs.
   'Albert,' snapped Ysabell, 'another one for breakfast.'
   The man turned his head slowly, and nodded at her without saying a word. She turned back to Mort.
   'I must say,' she said, 'that with the whole Disc to choose from, I should think Father could have done rather better than you. I suppose you'll just have to do.'
   She swept out of the room, slamming the door behind her.
   'Have to do what?' said Mort, to no-one in particular.
   The room was silent, except for the sizzle of the frying pan and the crumbling of coals in the molten heart of the stove. Mort saw that it had the words 'The Little Moloch (Patented)' embossed on its oven door.
   The cook didn't seem to notice him, so Mort pulled up a chair and sat down at the white scrubbed table.
   'Mushrooms?' said the old man, without looking around.
   'Hmm? What?'
   'I said, do you want mushrooms?'
   'Oh. Sorry. No, thank you,' said Mort.
   'Right you are, young sir.'
   He turned around and set out for the table.
   Even after he got used to it, Mort always held his breath when he watched Albert walking. Death's manservant was one of those stick-thin, raw-nosed old men who always look as though they are wearing gloves with the fingers cut out– even when they're not – and his walking involved a complicated sequence of movements. Albert leaned forward and his left arm started to swing, slowly at first but soon evolving into a wild jerking movement that finally and suddenly, at about the time when a watcher would have expected the armto fly off at the elbow, transferred itself down the length of his body to his legs and propelled him forward like a high-speed stilt walker. The frying pan followed a series of intricate curves in the air and was brought to a halt just over Mort's plate.
   Albert did indeed have exactly the right type of half-moon spectacles to peer over the top of.
   'There could be some porridge to follow,' he said, and winked, apparently to include Mort in the world porridge conspiracy.
   'Excuse me', said Mort, 'but where am I, exactly?'
   'Don't you know? This is the house of Death, lad. He brought you here last night.'
   'I– sort of remember. Only. . . .
   'Hmm?'
   'Well. The bacon and eggs,' said Mort, vaguely. 'It doesn't seem, well, appropriate.'
   'I've got some black pudding somewhere,' said Albert.
   'No, I mean . . .' Mort hesitated. 'It's just that I can't seehim sitting down to a couple of rashers and a fried slice.'
   Albert grinned. 'Oh, he doesn't, lad. Not as a regular thing, no. Very easy to cater for, the master. I just cook for me and—' he paused – 'the young lady, of course.'
   Mort nodded. 'Your daughter,' he said.
   'Mine? Ha,' said Albert. 'You're wrong there. She's his.'
   Mort stared down at his fried eggs. They stared back from their lake of fat. Albert had heard of nutritional values, and didn't hold with them.
   'Are we talking about the same person?' he said at last. Tall, wears black, he's a bit . . . skinny.
   'Adopted,' said Albert, kindly. 'It's rather a long story—'
   A bell jangled by his head.
   '— which will have to wait. He wants to see you in his study. I should run along if I were you. He doesn't like to be kept waiting. Understandable, really. Up the steps and first on the left. You can't miss it —'
   'It's got skulls and bones around the door?' said Mort, pushing back his chair.
   They all have, most of them,' sighed Albert. 'It's only his fancy. He doesn't mean anything by it.'
   Leaving his breakfast to congeal, Mort hurried up the steps, along the corridor and paused in front of the first door. He raised his hand to knock.
   ENTER.
   The handle turned of its own accord. The door swung inward.
   Death was seated behind a desk, peering intently into a vast leather book almost bigger than the desk itself. He looked up as Mort came in, keeping one calcareous finger marking his place, and grinned. There wasn't much of an alternative.
   AH, he said, and then paused. Then he scratched his chin, with a noise like a fingernail being pulled across a comb.
   WHO ARE YOU, BOY?
   'Mort, sir,' said Mort. 'Your apprentice. You remember?'
   Death stared at him for some time. Then the pinpoint blue eyes turned back at the book.
   OH YES, he said, MORT. WELL, BOY, DO YOU SINCERELY WISH TO LEARN THE UTTERMOST SECRETS OF TIME AND SPACE?
   'Yes, sir. I think so, sir.'
   GOOD. THE STABLES ARE AROUND THE BACK. THE SHOVEL HANGS JUST INSIDE THE DOOR.
   He looked down. He looked up. Mort hadn't moved.
   IS IT BY ANY CHANCE POSSIBLE THAT YOU FAIL TO UNDERSTAND ME?
   'Not fully, sir,' said Mort.
   DUNG, BOY. DUNG. ALBERT HAS A COMPOST HEAP IN THE GARDEN. I IMAGINE THERE'S A WHEELBARROW SOMEWHERE ON THE PREMISES. GET ON WITH IT.
   Mort nodded mournfully. 'Yes, sir. I see, sir. Sir?'
   YES?
   'Sir, I don't see what this has to do with the secrets of time and space.'
   Death did not look up from his book.
   THAT, he said, IS BECAUSE YOU ARE HERE TO LEARN.

   It is a fact that although the Death of the Discworld is, in his own words, an ANTHROPOMORPHIC PERSONIFICATION, he long ago gave up using the traditional skeletal horses, because of the bother of having to stop all the time to wire bits back on. Now his horses were always flesh-and-blood beasts, from the finest stock.
   And, Mort learned, very well fed.
   Some jobs offer increments. This one offered– well, quite the reverse, but at least it was in the warm and fairly easy to get the hang of. After a while he got into the rhythm of it, and started playing the private little quantity-surveying game that everyone plays in these circumstances. Let's see, he thought, I've done nearly a quarter, let's call it a third, so when I've done that corner by the hayrack it'll be more than half, call it five-eighths, which means three more wheelbarrow loads. . . . It doesn't prove anything very much except that the awesome splendour of the universe is much easier to deal with if you think of it as aseries of small chunks.
   The horse watched him from its stall, occasionally trying to eat his hair in a friendly sort of way.
   After a while he became aware that someone else was watching him. The girl Ysabell was leaning on the half-door, her chin in her hands.
   'Are you a servant?' she said.
   Mort straightened up.
   'No,' he said, 'I'm an apprentice.'
   'That's silly. Albert said you can't be an apprentice.'
   Mort concentrated on hefting a shovelful into the wheelbarrow. Two more shovelfuls, call it three if it's well pressed down, and that means four more barrows, all right, call it five, before I've done halfway to the . .
   'He says,' said Ysabell in a louder voice, 'that apprentices become masters, and you can't have more than one Death. So you're just a servant and you have to do what I say.'
   . . . and then eight more barrows means it's all done all the way to the door, which is nearly two-thirds of the whole thing, which means. . . .
   'Did you hear what I said, boy?'
   Mort nodded. And then it'll be fourteen more barrows, only call it fifteen because I haven't swept up properly in the corner, and. . . .
   'Have you lost your tongue?'
   'Mort,' said Mort mildly.
   She looked at him furiously. 'What?'
   'My name is Mort,' said Mort. 'Or Mortimer. Most people call me Mort. Did you want to talk to me about something?'
   She was speechless for a moment, staring from his face to the shovel and back again.
   'Only I've been told to get on with this,' said Mort.
   She exploded.
   'Why are you here? Why did Father bring you here?'
   'He hired me at the hiring fair,' said Mort. 'All the boys got hired. And me.'
   'And you wanted to be hired?' she snapped. 'He's Death, you know. The Grim Reaper. He's very important. He's not something youbecome, he's something youare.'
   Mort gestured vaguely at the wheelbarrow.
   'I expect it'll turn out for the best,' he said. 'My father always says things generally do.'
   He picked up the shovel and turned away, and grinned at the horse's backside as he heard Ysabell snort and walk away.
   Mort worked steadily through the sixteenths, eighths, quarters and thirds, wheeling the barrow out through the yard to the heap by the apple tree.
   Death's garden was big, neat and well-tended. It was also very, very black. The grass was black. The flowers were black. Black apples gleamed among the black leaves of a black apple tree. Even the air looked inky.
   Alter a while Mort thought he could see– no, he couldn't possibly imagine he could see . . . different colours of black.
   That's to say, not simply very dark tones of red and green and whatever, but real shades of black. A whole spectrum of colours, all different and all– well, black. He tipped out the last load, put the barrow away, and went back to the house.
   ENTER.
   Death was standing behind a lectern, poring over a map. He looked at Mort as if he wasn't entirely there.
   YOU HAVEN'T HEARD OF THE BAY OF MANTE, HAVE YOU? he said.
   'No, sir,' said Mort.
   FAMOUS SHIPWRECK THERE.
   'Was there?'
   THERE WILL BE, said Death, IF I CAN FIND THE DAMN PLACE.
   Mort walked around the lectern and peered at the map.
   'You're going to sink the ship?' he said.
   Death looked horrified.
   CERTAINLY NOT. THERE WILL BE A COMBINATION OF BAD SEAMANSHIP, SHALLOW WATER AND A CONTRARY WIND.
   'That's horrible,' said Mort. 'Will there be many drowned?'
   THAT'S UP TO FATE, said Death, turning to the bookcase behind him and pulling out a heavy gazetteer. THERE'S NOTHING I CAN DO ABOUT IT. WHAT IS THAT SMELL?
   'Me,' said Mort, simply.
   AH, THE STABLES. Death paused, his hand on the spine of the book. AND WHY DO YOU THINK I DIRECTED YOU TO THE STABLES? THINK CAREFULLY, NOW.
   Mort hesitated. Hehad been thinking carefully, in between counting wheelbarrows. He'd wondered if it had been to coordinate his hand and eye, or teach him the habit of obedience, or bring home to him the importance, on the human scale, of small tasks, or make him realize that even great men must start at the bottom. None of these explanations seemed exactly right.
   'I think . . .' he began.
   YES?
   'Well, I think it was because you were up to your knees in horseshit, to tell you the truth.'
   Death looked at him for a long time. Mort shifted uneasily from one foot to the other.
   ABSOLUTELY CORRECT, snapped Death. CLARITY OF THOUGHT. REALISTIC APPROACH. VERY IMPORTANT IN A JOB LIKE OURS.
   'Yes, sir. Sir?'
   HMM? Death was struggling with the index.
   'People die all the time, sir, don't they? Millions. You must be very busy. But—'
   Death gave Mort the look he was coming to be familiar with. It started off as blank surprise, flickered briefly towards annoyance, called in for a drink at recognition and settled finally on vague forbearance.
   BUT?
   'I'd have thought you'd have been, well, out and about a bit more. You know. Stalking the streets. My granny's almanack's got a picture of you with a scythe and stuff.'
   I SEE. I AM AFRAID IT IS HARD TO EXPLAIN UNLESS YOU KNOW ABOUT POINT INCARNATION AND NODE FOCUSING. I DON'T EXPECT YOU DO?
   'I don't think so.'
   GENERALLY I'M ONLY EXPECTED TO MAKE AN ACTUAL APPEARANCE ON SPECIAL OCCASIONS.
   'Like a king, I suppose,' said Mort. 'I mean, a king is reigning even when he's doing something else or asleep, even. Is that it, sir?'
   IT'LL DO, said Death, rolling up the maps. AND NOW, BOY, IF YOU'VE FINISHED THE STABLE YOU CAN GO AND SEE IF ALBERT HAS ANY JOBS HE WANTS DOING. IF YOU LIKE, YOU CAN COME OUT ON THE ROUND WITH ME THIS EVENING.
   Mort nodded. Death went back to his big leather book, took up a pen, stared at it for a moment, and then looked up at Mort with his skull on one side.
   HAVE YOU MET MY DAUGHTER? he said.
   'Er. Yes, sir,' said Mort, his hand on the doorknob.
   SHE IS A VERY PLEASANT GIRL, said Death, BUT I THINK SHE QUITE LIKES HAVING SOMEONE OF HER OWN AGE AROUND TO TALK TO.
   'Sir?'
   AND, OF COURSE, ONE DAY ALL THIS WILL BELONG TO HER.
   Something like a small blue supernova flared for a moment in the depths of his eyesockets. It dawned on Mort that, with some embarrassment and complete lack of expertise, Death was trying to wink.

   In a landscape that owed nothing to time and space, which appeared on no map, which existed only in those far reaches of the multiplexed cosmos known to the few astrophysicists who have taken really bad acid, Mort spent the afternoon helping Albert plant out broccoli. It was black, tinted with purple.
   'He tries, see,' said Albert, flourishing the dibber. 'It's just that when it comes to colour, he hasn't got much imagination.'
   'I'm not sure I understand all this,' said Mort. 'Did you say hemade all this?'
   Beyond the garden wall the ground dropped towards a deep valley and then rose into dark moorland that marched all the way to distant mountains, jagged as cats' teeth.
   'Yeah,' said Albert. 'Mind what you're doing with that watering can.'
   'What was here before?'
   'I dunno,' said Albert, starting a fresh row. 'Firmament, I suppose. That's the fancy name for raw nothing. It's not a very good job of work, to tell the truth. I mean, the garden's okay, but the mountains are downright shoddy. They're all fuzzy when you get up close. I went and had a look once.'
   Mort squinted hard at the trees nearest him. They seemed commendably solid.
   'What'd he do it all for?' he said.
   Albert grunted. 'Do you know what happens to lads who ask too many questions?'
   Mort thought for a moment.
   'No,' he said eventually, 'what?'
   There was silence.
   Then Albert straightened up and said, 'Damned if I know. Probably they get answers, and serve 'em right.'
   'He said I could go out with him tonight,' said Mort.
   'You're a lucky boy then, aren't you,' said Albert vaguely, heading back for the cottage.
   'Did hereally make all this?' said Mort, tagging along after him.
   'Yes.'
   'Why?'
   'I suppose he wanted somewhere where he could feel at home.'
   'Are you dead, Albert?'
   'Me? Do I look dead?' The old man snorted when Mort started to give him a slow, critical look, 'and you can stop that. I'm as alive as you are. Probably more.'
   'Sorry.'
   'Right.' Albert pushed open the back door, and turned to regard Mort as kindly as he could manage.
   'It's best not to ask all these questions,' he said, 'it upsets people. Now, how about a nice fry-up?'

   The bell rang while they were playing dominoes. Mort sat to attention.
   'He'll want the horse made ready,' said Albert. 'Come on.'
   They went out to the stable in the gathering dusk, and Mort watched the old man saddle up Death's horse.
   'His name's Binky,' said Albert, fastening the girth. 'It just goes to show, you never can tell.'
   Binky tried to eat his scarf in an affectionate way.
   Mort remembered the woodcut in his grandmother's almanack, between the page on planting times and the phases of the moon section, showing Dethe the Great Levyller Comes To Alle Menne. He'd stared at it hundreds of times when learning his letters. It wouldn't have been half so impressive if it had been generally known that the flame-breathing horse the spectre rode was called Binky.
   'I would have thought something like Fang or Sabre or Ebony,' Albert continued, 'but the master will have his little fancies, you know. Looking forward to it, are you?'
   'I think so,' said Mort uncertainly. 'I've never seen Death actually at work.'
   'Not many have,' said Albert. 'Not twice, at any rate.'
   Mort took a deep breath.
   'About this daughter of his—' he began.
   AH, GOOD EVENING, ALBERT, BOY.
   'Mort,' said Mort automatically.
   Death strode into the stable, stooping a little to clear the ceiling. Albert nodded, not in any subservient way, Mort noticed, but simply out of form. Mort had met one or two servants, on the rare occasions he'd been taken into town, and Albert wasn't like any of them. He seemed to act as though the house really belonged to him and its owner was just a passing guest, something to be tolerated like peeling paintwork or spiders in the lavatory. Death put up with it too, as though he and Albert had said everything that needed to be said a long time ago and were simply content, now, to get on with their jobs with the minimum of inconvenience all around. To Mort it was rather like going for a walk after a really bad thunderstormy thing was quite fresh, nothing was particularly unpleasant, but there was the sense of vast energies just expended.
   Finding out about Albert tagged itself on to the end of his list of things to do.
   HOLD THIS, said Death, and pushed a scythe into his hand while he swung himself up on to Binky. The scythe looked normal enough, except for the blade: it was so thin that Mort could see through it, a pale blue shimmer in the air that could slice flame and chop sound. He held it very carefully.
   RIGHT, BOY, said Death. COME ON UP. ALBERT. DON'T WAIT UP.
   The horse trotted out of the courtyard and into the sky.
   There should have been a flash or rush of stars. The air should have spiralled and turned into speeding sparks such as normally happens in the common, everyday trans-dimensional hyper-jumps. But this was Death, who has mastered the art of going everywhere without ostentation and could slide between dimensions as easily as he could slip through a locked door, and they moved at an easy gallop through cloud canyons, past great billowing mountains of cumulus, until the wisps parted in front of them and the Disc lay below, basking in sunlight.
   THAT'S BECAUSE TIME IS ADJUSTABLE, said Death, when Mort pointed this out. IT'S NOT REALLY IMPORTANT.
   'I always thought it was.'
   PEOPLE THINK IT'S IMPORTANT ONLY BECAUSE THEY INVENTED IT, said Death somberly. Mort considered this rather trite, but decided not to argue.
   'What are we going to do now?' he said.
   THERE'S A PROMISING WAR IN KLATCHISTAN, said Death. SEVERAL PLAGUE OUTBREAKS. ONE RATHER IMPORTANT ASSASSINATION, IF YOU'D PREFER.
   'What, a murder?'
   AYE, A KING.
   'Oh, kings,' said Mort dismissively. He knew about kings. Once a year a band of strolling players, or at any rate ambling ones, came to Sheepridge and the plays they performed were invariably about kings. Kings were always killing one another, or being killed. The plots were quite complicated, involving mistaken identity, poisons, battles, long-lost sons, ghosts, witches and, usually, lots of daggers. Since it was clear that being a king was no picnic it was amazing that half the cast were apparently trying to become one. Mort's idea of palace life was a little hazy, but he imagined that no one got much sleep.
   'I'd quite like to see a real king,' he said. 'They wear crowns all the time, my granny said. Even when they go to the lavatory.'
   Death considered this carefully.
   THERE'S NO TECHNICAL REASON WHY NOT, he conceded. IN MY EXPERIENCE, HOWEVER, IT IS GENERALLY NOT THE CASE.
   The horse wheeled, and the vast flat checkerboard of the Sto plain sped underneath them at lightning speed. This was rich country, full of silt and rolling cabbage fields and neat little kingdoms whose boundaries wriggled like snakes as small, formal wars, marriage pacts, complex alliances and the occasional bit of sloppy cartography changed the political shape of the land.
   'This king,' said Mort, as a forest zipped beneath them, 'is he good or bad?'
   I NEVER CONCERN MYSELF WITH SUCH THINGS, said Death. HE'S NO WORSE THAN ANY OTHER KING, I IMAGINE.
   'Does he have people put to death?' said Mort, and remembering who he was talking to added, 'Saving y' honour's presence, of course.'
   SOMETIMES. THERE ARE SOME THINGS YOU HAVE TO DO, WHEN YOU'RE A KING.
   A city slid below them, clustered around a castle built on a rock outcrop that poked up out of the plain like a geological pimple. It was one huge rock from the distant Ramtops, Death said, left there by the retreating ice in the legendary days when the Ice Giants waged war on the gods and rode their glaciers across the land in an attempt to freeze the whole world. They'd given up in the end, however, and driven their great glittering flocks back to their hidden lands among the razor-backed mountains near the Hub. No one on the plains knew why they had done this; it was generally considered by the younger generation in the city of Sto Lat, the city around the rock, that it was because the place was dead boring.
   Binky trotted down over nothingness and touched down on the flagstones of the castle's topmost tower. Death dismounted and told Mort to sort out the nosebag.
   'Won't people notice there's a horse up here?' he said, as they strolled to a stairwell.
   Death shook his head.
   WOULD YOU BELIEVE THERE COULD BE A HORSE AT THE TOP OF THIS TOWER? he said.
   'No. You couldn't get one up these stairs,' said Mort.
   WELL, THEN?
   'Oh. I see. People don't want to see what can't possibly exist.'
   WELL DONE.
   Now they were walking along a wide corridor hung with tapestries. Death reached into his robe and pulled out an hourglass, peering closely at it in the dim light.
   It was a particularly fine one, its glass cut into intricate facets and imprisoned in an ornate framework of wood and brass. The words 'King Olerve the Bastard' were engraved deeply into it.
   The sand inside sparkled oddly. There wasn't a lot left.
   Death hummed to himself and stowed the glass away in whatever mysterious recess it had occupied.
   They turned a corner and hit a wall of sound. There was a hall full of people there, under a cloud of smoke and chatter that rose all the way up into the banner-haunted shadows in the roof. Up in a gallery a trio of minstrels were doing their best to be heard and not succeeding.
   The appearance of Death didn't cause much of a stir. A footman by the door turned to him, opened his mouth and then frowned in a distracted way and thought of something else. A few courtiers glanced in their direction, their eyes instantly unfocusing as common sense overruled the other five.
   WE'VE GOT A FEW MINUTES, said Death, taking a drink from a passing tray, LET'S MINGLE.
   'They can't see me either!' said Mort. 'But I'm real!'
   REALITY IS NOT ALWAYS WHAT IT SEEMS, said Death. ANYWAY, IF THEY DON'T WANT TO SEE ME, THEY CERTAINLY DON'T WANT TO SEE YOU. THESE ARE ARISTOCRATS, BOY. THEY'REGOOD AT NOT SEEING THINGS. WHY IS THERE A CHERRY ON A STICK IN THIS DRINK?
   'Mort,' said Mort absentmindedly.
   IT'S NOT AS IF IT DOES ANYTHING FOR THE FLAVOUR. WHY DOES ANYONE TAKE A PERFECTLY GOOD DRINK AND THEN PUT IN A CHERRY ON A POLE?
   'What's going to happen next?' said Mort. An elderly earl bumped into his elbow, looked everywhere but directly at him, shrugged and walked away.
   TAKE THESE THINGS, NOW, said Death, fingering a passing canape. I MEAN, MUSHROOMS YES, CHICKEN YES, CREAM YES, I'VE NOTHING AGAINST ANY OF THEM, BUT WHY IN THE NAME OF SANITY MINCE THEM ALL UP AND PUT THEM IN LITTLE PASTRY CASES?
   'Pardon?' said Mort.
   THAT'S MORTALS FOR YOU, Death continued. THEY'VE ONLY GOT A FEW YEARS IN THIS WORLD AND THEY SPEND THEM ALL IN MAKING THINGS COMPLICATED FOR THEMSELVES. FASCINATING. HAVE A GHERKIN.
   'Where's the king?' said Mort, craning to look over the heads of the court.
   CHAP WITH THE GOLDEN BEARD, said Death. He tapped a flunky on the shoulder, and as the man turned and looked around in puzzlement deftly piloted another drink from his tray.
   Mort cast around until he saw the figure standing in a little group in the centre of the crowd, leaning over slightly the better to hear what a rather short courtier was saying to him. He was a tall, heavily-built man with the kind of stolid, patient face that one would confidently buy a used horse from.
   'He doesn't look abad king,' said Mort. 'Why would anyone want to kill him?'
   SEE THE MAN NEXT TO HIM? WITH THE LITTLE MOUSTACHE AND THE GRIN LIKE A LIZARD? Death pointed with his scythe. 'Yes?' HIS COUSIN, THE DUKE OF STO HELIT. NOT THE NICEST OF PEOPLE, said Death. A HANDY MAN WITH A BOTTLE OF POISON. FIFTH IN LINE TO THE THRONE LAST YEAR, NOW SECOND IN LINE. BIT OF A SOCIAL CLIMBER, YOU MIGHT SAY. He fumbled inside his robe and produced an hourglass in which black sand coursed between a spiked iron latticework. He gave it an experimental shake. AND DUE TO LIVE ANOTHER THIRTY, THIRTY-FIVE YEARS, he said, with a sigh.
   'And he goes around killing people?' said Mort. He shook his head. There's no justice.'
   Death sighed. NO, he said, handing his drink to a page who was surprised to find he was suddenly holding an empty glass, THERE'S JUST ME.
   He drew his sword, which had the same ice blue, shadow-thin blade as the scythe of office, and stepped forward.
   'I thought you used the scythe,' whispered Mort.
   KINGS GET THE SWORD, said Death. IT'S A ROYAL, WHATSNAME, PREROGATIVE.
   His free hand thrust its bony digits beneath his robe again and brought out King Olerve's glass. In the top half the last few grains of sand were huddling together.
   PAY CAREFUL ATTENTION, said Death, YOU MAY BE ASKED QUESTIONS AFTERWARDS.
   'Wait,' said Mort, wretchedly. 'It's not fair. Can't you stop it?'
   FAIR? said Death. WHO SAID ANYTHING ABOUT FAIR?
   'Well, if the other man is such a—'
   LISTEN, said Death, FAIR DOESN'T COME INTO IT. YOU CAN'T TAKE SIDES. GOOD GRIEF. WHEN IT'S TIME, IT'S TIME. THAT'S ALL THERE IS TO IT, BOY.
   'Mort,' moaned Mort, staring at the crowd.
   And then he saw her. A random movement in the people opened up a channel between Mort and a slim, red-haired girl seated among a group of older women behind the king. She wasn't exactly beautiful, being over-endowed in the freckle department and, frankly, rather on the skinny side. But the sight of her caused a shock that hot-wired Mort's hindbrain and drove it all the way to the pit of his stomach, laughing nastily.
   IT'S TIME, said Death, giving Mort a nudge with a sharp elbow. FOLLOW ME.
   Death walked toward the king, weighing his sword in his hand. Mort blinked, and started to follow. The girl's eyes met his for a second and immediately looked away– then swivelled back, dragging her head around, her mouth starting to open in an 'o' of horror.
   Mort's backbone melted. He started to run towards the king.
   'Look out!' he screamed. 'You're in great danger!'
   And the world turned into treacle. It began to fill up with blue and purple shadows, like a heatstroke dream, and sound faded away until the roar of the court became distant and scritchy, like the music in someone else's headphones. Mort saw Death standing companionably by the king, his eyes turned up towards—
   — the minstrel gallery.
   Mort saw the bowman, saw the bow, saw the bolt now winging through the air at the speed of a sick snail. Slow as it was, he couldn't outrun it. It seemed like hours before he could bring his leaden legs under control, but finally he managed to get both feet to touch the floor at the same time and kicked away with all the apparent acceleration of continental drift.
   As he twisted slowly through the air Death said, without rancour, IT WON'T WORK, YOU KNOW. IT'S ONLY NATURAL THAT YOU SHOULD WANT TO TRY, BUT IT WON'T WORK.
   Dream-like, Mort drifted through a silent world. . . .
   The bolt struck. Death brought his sword around in a double-handed swing that passed gently through the king's neck without leaving a mark. To Mort, spiralling gently through the twilight world, it looked as though a ghostly shape had dropped away.
   It couldn't be the king, because he was manifestly still standing there, looking directly at Death with an expression of extreme surprise. There was a shadowysomething around his feet, and a long way away people were reacting with shouts and screams.
   A GOOD CLEAN JOB, said Death. ROYALTY ARE ALWAYS A PROBLEM. THEY TEND TO WANT TO HANG ON. YOUR AVERAGE PEASANT, NOW, HE CAN'T WAIT.
   'Who the hell are you?' said the king. 'What are you doing here? Eh? Guards! I demand—' The insistent message from his eyes finally battered through to his brain. Mort was impressed. King Olerve had held on to his throne for many years and, even when dead, knew how to behave. 'Oh,' he said, 'I see. I didn't expect to see you so soon.'
   YOUR MAJESTY, said Death, bowing, FEW DO.
   The king looked around. It was quiet and dim in this shadow world, but outside there seemed to be a lot of excitement.
   'That's me down there, is it?'
   I AM AFRAID SO, SIRE.
   'Clean job. Crossbow, was it?'
   YES. AND NOW, SIRE, IF YOU WOULD—
   'Who did it?' said the king. Death hesitated.
   A HIRED ASSASSIN FROM ANKH-MORPORK, he said.
   'Hmm. Clever. I congratulate Sto Helit. And here's me filling myself with antidotes. No antidote to cold steel, eh? Eh?'
   INDEED NOT, SIRE.
   'The old rope ladder and fast horse by the drawbridge trick, eh?'
   SO IT WOULD APPEAR, SIRE, said Death, taking the king's shade gently by the arm. IF IT'S ANY CONSOLATION, THOUGH, THE HORSENEEDS TO BE FAST.
   'Eh?'
   Death allowed his fixed grin to widen a little.
   I HAVE AN APPOINTMENT WITH ITS RIDER TOMORROW IN ANKH, said Death. YOU SEE, HE ALLOWED THE DUKE TO PROVIDE HIM WITH A PACKED LUNCH.
   The king, whose eminent suitability for his job meant that he was not automatically quick on the uptake, considered this for a moment and then gave a short laugh. He noticed Mort for the first time.
   'Who's this?' he said, 'He dead too?'
   MY APPRENTICE, said Death. WHO WILL BE GETTING A GOOD TALKING-TO BEFORE HE'S MUCH OLDER, THE SCALLYWAG.
   'Mort,' said Mort automatically. The sound of their talking washed around him, but he couldn't take his eyes off the scene around them. He felt real. Death looked solid. The king looked surprisingly fit and well for someone who was dead. But the rest of the world was a mass of sliding shadows. Figures were bent over the slumped body, moving through Mort as if they were no more substantial than a mist.
   The girl was kneeling down, weeping.
   'That's my daughter,' said the king. 'I ought to feel sad. Why don't I?'
   EMOTIONS GET LEFT BEHIND. IT'S ALL A MATTER OF GLANDS.
   'Ah. That would be it, I suppose. She can't see us, can she?'
   NO.
   'I suppose there's no chance that I could—?'
   NONE, said Death.
   'Only she's going to be queen, and if I could only let her—'
   SORRY.
   The girl looked up and through Mort. He watched the duke walk up behind her and lay a comforting hand on her shoulder. A fault smile hovered around the man's lips. It was the sort of smile that lies on sandbanks waiting for incautious swimmers.
   'I can't make you hear me, Mort said. Don't trust him!
   She peered at Mort, screwing up her eyes. He reached out, and watched his hand pass straight through hers.
   COME ALONG, BOY. NO LALLYGAGGING.
   Mort felt Death's hand tighten on his shoulder, not in an unfriendly fashion. He turned away reluctantly, following Death and the king.
   They walked out through the wall. He was halfway after them before he realized that walking through walls was impossible.
   The suicidal logic of this nearly killed him. He felt the chill of the stone around his limbs before a voice in his ear said:
   LOOK AT IT THIS WAY. THE WALL CANT BE THERE. OTHERWISE YOU WOULDN'T BE WALKING THROUGH IT. WOULD YOU, BOY?
   'Mort,' said Mort.
   WHAT?
   'My name is Mort. Or Mortimer,' said Mort angrily, pushing forward. The chill fell behind him.
   THERE. THAT WASN'T SO HARD, WAS IT?
   Mort looked up and down the length of the corridor, and slapped the wall experimentally. He must have walked through it, but it felt solid enough now. Little specks of mica glittered at him.
   'How do you do that stuff?' he said. 'How do I do it? Is it magic?'
   MAGIC IS THE ONE THING IT ISN'T, BOY. WHEN YOU CAN DO IT BY YOURSELF, THERE WILL BE NOTHING MORE THAT I CAN TEACH YOU.
   The king, who was considerably more diffuse now, said, 'It's impressive, I'll grant you. By the way, I seem to be fading.'
   IT'S THE MORPHOGENETIC FIELD WEAKENING, said Death.
   The king's voice was no louder than a whisper. 'Is that what it is?'
   IT HAPPENS TO EVERYONE. TRY TO ENJOY IT.
   'How?' Now the voice was no more than a shape in the air.
   JUST BE YOURSELF.
   At that moment the king collapsed, growing smaller and smaller in the air as the field finally collapsed into a tiny, brilliant pinpoint. It happened so quickly that Mort almost missed it. From ghost to mote in half a second, with a faint sigh.
   Death gently caught the glittering thing and stowed it away somewhere under his robe.
   'What's happened to him?' said Mort.
   ONLY HE KNOWS, said Death. COME.
   'My granny says that dying is like going to sleep,' Mort added, a shade hopefully.
   I WOULDN'T KNOW. I HAVE DONE NEITHER.
   Mort took a last look along the corridor. The big doors had been flung back and the court was spilling out. Two older women were endeavouring to comfort the princess, but she was striding ahead of them so that they bounced along behind her like a couple of fussy balloons. They disappeared up another corridor.
   ALREADY A QUEEN, said Death, approvingly. Death liked style.
   They were on the roof before he spoke again.
   You TRIED TO WARN HIM, he said, removing Binky's nosebag.
   'Yes, sir. Sorry.'
   YOU CANNOT INTERFERE WITH FATE. WHO ARE YOU TO JUDGE WHO SHOULD LIVE AND WHO SHOULD DIE?
   Death watched Mort's expression carefully.
   ONLY THE GODS ARE ALLOWED TO DO THAT, he added. To TINKER WITH THE FATE OF EVEN ONE INDIVIDUAL COULD DESTROY THE WHOLE WORLD. DO YOU UNDERSTAND?
   Mort nodded miserably. 'Are you going to send me home?' he said. Death reached down and swung him up behind the saddle. BECAUSE YOU SHOWED COMPASSION? NO. I MIGHT HAVE DONE IF YOU HAD SHOWN PLEASURE. BUT YOU MUST LEARN THE COMPASSION PROPER TO YOUR TRADE.
   'What's that?'
   ASHARP EDGE.

   Days passed, although Mort wasn't certain how many. The gloomy sun of Death's world rolled regularly across the sky, but the visits to mortal space seemed to adhere to no particular system. Nor did Death visit only kings and important battles; most of the personal visits were to quite ordinary people.
   Meals were served up by Albert, who smiled to himself a lot and didn't say anything much. Ysabell kept to her room most of the time, or rode her own pony on the black moors above the cottage. The sight of her with her hair streaming in the wind would have been more impressive if she was a better horse-woman, or if the pony had been rather larger, or if her hair was the sort that streams naturally. Some hair has got it, and some hasn't. Hers hadn't.
   When he wasn't out on what Death referred to as THE DUTY Mort assisted Albert, or found jobs in the garden or stable, or browsed through Death's extensive library, reading with the speed and omnivorousness common to those who discover the magic of the written word for the first time.
   Most of the books in the library were biographies, of course.
   They were unusual in one respect. They were writing themselves. People who had already died, obviously, filled their books from cover to cover, and those who hadn't been born yet had to put up with blank pages. Those in between . . . Mort took note, marking the place and counting the extra lines, and estimated that some books were adding paragraphs at the rate of four or five every day. He didn't recognize the handwriting.
   And finally he plucked up his courage.

   A WHAT? said Death in astonishment, sitting behind his ornate desk and turning his scythe-shaped paperknife over and over in his hands.
   'An afternoon off,' repeated Mort. The room suddenly seemed to be oppressively big, with himself very exposed in the middle of a carpet about the size of a field.
   BUT WHY? said Death. IT CANT BE TO ATTEND YOUR GRANDMOTHER'S FUNERAL, he added. I WOULD KNOW.
   'I just want to, you know, get out and meet people,' said Mort, trying to outstare that unflinching blue gaze.
   BUT YOU MEET PEOPLE EVERY DAY, protested Death.
   'Yes, I know, only, well, not for very long,' said Mort. 'I mean, it'd be nice to meet someone with a life expectancy of more than a few minutes. Sir,' he added.
   Death drummed his fingers on the desk, making a sound not unlike a mouse tap-dancing, and gave Mort another few seconds of stare. He noticed that the boy seemed rather less elbows than he remembered, stood a little more upright and, bluntly, could use a word like 'expectancy'. It was all that library.
   ALL RIGHT, he said grudgingly. BUT IT SEEMS TO ME YOU HAVE EVERYTHING YOU NEED RIGHT HERE. THE DUTY IS NOT ONEROUS, IS IT?
   'No, sir.'
   AND YOU HAVE GOOD FOOD AND A WARM BED AND RECREATION AND PEOPLE YOUR OWN AGE.
   'Pardon, sir?' said Mort.
   MY DAUGHTER, said Death. YOU HAVE MET HER, I BELIEVE.
   'Oh. Yes, sir.'
   SHE HAS A VERY WARM PERSONALITY WHEN YOU GET TO KNOW HER.
   'I am sure she has, sir.'
   NEVERTHELESS, YOU WISH– Death launched the words with a spin of distaste – AN AFTERNOON OFF? 'Yes, sir. If you please, sir.'
   VERY WELL. So BE IT. You MAY HAVE UNTIL SUNSET.
   Death opened his great ledger, picked up a pen, and began to write. Occasionally he'd reach out and flick the beads of an abacus.
   After a minute he looked up.
   YOU'RE STILL HERE, he said. AND IN YOUR OWN TIME, TOO, he added sourly.
   'Um,' said Mort, 'will people be able to see me, sir?'
   I IMAGINE SO, I'M SURE, said Death. Is THERE ANYTHING ELSE I MIGHT BE ABLE TO ASSIST YOU WITH BEFORE YOU LEAVE FOR THIS DEBAUCH?
   'Well, sir, there is one thing, sir, I don't know how to get to the mortal world, sir,' said Mort desperately.
   Death sighed loudly, and pulled open a desk drawer.
   JUST WALK THERE.
   Mort nodded miserably, and took the long walk to the study door. As he pulled it open Death coughed.
   BOY! he called, and tossed something across the room.
   Mort caught it automatically as the door creaked open.
   The doorway vanished. The deep carpet underfoot became muddy cobbles. Broad daylight poured over him like quick-silver.
   'Mort,' said Mort, to the universe at large.
   'What?' said a stallholder beside him. Mort stared around. He was in a crowded market place, packed with people and animals. Every kind of thing was being sold from needles to (via a few itinerant prophets) visions of salvation. It was impossible to hold any conversation quieter than a shout.
   Mort tapped the stallholder in the small of the back.
   'Can you see me?' he demanded.
   The stallholder squinted critically at him.
   'I reckon so,' he said, 'or someone very much like you.'
   Thank you,' said Mort, immensely relieved.
   'Don't mention it. I see lots of people every day, no charge. Want to buy any bootlaces?'
   'I don't think so,' said Mort. 'What place is this?'
   'You don't know?'
   A couple of people at the next stall were looking at Mort thoughtfully. His mind went into overdrive.
   'My master travels a lot,' he said, truthfully. 'We arrived last night, and I was asleep on the cart. Now I've got the afternoon off.'
   'Ah,' said the stallholder. He leaned forward conspiratorially. 'Looking for a good time, are you? I could fix you up.'
   'I'd quite enjoy knowing where I am,' Mort conceded.
   The man was taken aback.
   'This is Ankh-Morpork,' he said. 'Anyone ought to be able to see that. Smell it, too.'
   Mort sniffed. There was a certain something about the air in the city. You got the feeling that it was air that had seen life. You couldn't help noting with every breath that thousands of other people were very close to you and nearly all of them had armpits.
   The stallholder regarded Mort critically, noting the pale face, well-cut clothes and strange presence, a sort of coiled spring effect.
   'Look, I'll be frank,' he said. 'I could point you in the direction of a great brothel.'
   'I've already had lunch,' said Mort, vaguely. 'But you can tell me if we're anywhere near, I think it's called Sto Lat?'
   'About twenty miles Hubwards, but there's nothing there for a young man of your kidney,' said the trader hurriedly. 'I know,
   you're out by yourself, you want new experiences, you want excitement, romance—'
   Mort, meanwhile, had opened the bag Death had given him. It was full of small gold coins, about the size of sequins.
   An image formed again in his mind, of a pale young face under a head of red hair who had somehow known he was there. The unfocused feelings that had haunted his mind for the last few days suddenly sharpened to a point.
   'I want,' he said firmly, 'a very fast horse.'

   Five minutes later, Mort was lost.
   This part of Ankh-Morpork was known as The Shades, an inner-city area sorely in need either of governmental help or, for preference, a flamethrower. It couldn't be called squalid because that would be stretching the word to breaking point. It was beyond squalor and out the other side, where by a sort of Einsteinian reversal it achieved a magnificent horribleness that it wore like an architectural award. It was noisy and sultry and smelled like a cowshed floor.
   It didn't so much have a neighbourhood as an ecology, like a great land-based coral reef. There were the humans, all right, humanoid equivalents of lobsters, squid, shrimps and so on. And sharks.
   Mort wandered hopelessly along the winding streets. Anyone hovering at rooftop height would have noticed a certain pattern in the crowds behind him, suggesting a number of men converging nonchalantly on a target, and would rightly have concluded that Mort and his gold had about the same life expectancy as a three-legged hedgehog on a six-lane motorway.
   It is probably already apparent that The Shades was not the sort of place to have inhabitants. It had denizens. Periodically Mort would try to engage one in conversation, to find the way to a good horse dealer. The denizen would usually mutter something and hurry away, since anyone wishing to live in The Shades for longer than maybe three hours developed very specialized senses indeed and would no more hang around near Mort than a peasant would stand near a tall tree in thundery weather.
   And so Mort came at last to the river Ankh, greatest of rivers. Even before it entered the city it was slow and heavy with the silt of the plains, and by the time it got to The Shades even an agnostic could have walked across it. It was hard to drown in the Ankh, but easy to suffocate.
   Mort looked at the surface doubtfully. It seemed to be moving. There were bubbles in it. It had to be water.
   He sighed, and turned away.
   Three men had appeared behind him, as though extruded from the stonework. They had the heavy, stolid look of those thugs whose appearance in any narrative means that it's time for the hero to be menaced a bit, although not too much, because it's also obvious that they're going to be horribly surprised.
   They were leering. They were good at it.
   One of them had drawn a knife, which he waved in little circles in the air. He advanced slowly towards Mort, while the other two hung back to provide immoral support.
   'Give us the money,' he rasped.
   Mort's hand went to the bag on his belt.
   'Hang on a minute,' he said. 'What happens then?'
   'What?'
   'I mean, is it my money or my life?' said Mort. 'That's the sort of thing robbers are supposed to demand. Your money or your life. I read that in a book once,' he added.
   'Possibly, possibly,' conceded the robber. He felt he was losing the initiative, but rallied magnificently. 'On the other hand, it could be your moneyand your life. Pulling off the double, you might say.' The man looked sideways at his colleagues, who sniggered on cue.
   'In that case—' said Mort, and hefted the bag in one hand preparatory to chucking it as far out into the Ankh as he could, even though there was a reasonable chance it would bounce.
   'Hey, what are you doing,'said the robber. He started to run forward, but halted when Mort gave the bag a threatening jerk.
   'Well,' said Mort, 'I look at it like this. If you're going to kill me anyway, I might as well get rid of the money. It's entirely up to you.' To illustrate his point he took one coin out of the bag and flicked it out across the water, which accepted it with an unfortunate sucking noise. The thieves shuddered.
   The leading thief looked at the bag. He looked at his knife. He looked at Mort's face. He looked at his colleagues.
   'Excuse me,' he said, and they went into a huddle.
   Mort measured the distance to the end of the alley. He wouldn't make it. Anyway, these three looked as though chasing people was another thing they were good at. It was only logic that left them feeling a little stretched.
   Their leader turned back to Mort. He gave a final glance at the other two. They both nodded decisively.
   'I think we kill you and take a chance on the money,' he said. 'We don't want this sort of thing to spread.'
   The other two drew their knives.
   Mort swallowed. 'This could be unwise,' he said.
   'Why?'
   'Well,I won't like it, for one.'
   'You're not supposed to like it, you're supposed to– die,' said the thief, advancing.
   'I don't think I'm due to die,' said Mort, backing away. 'I'm sure I would have been told.'
   'Yeah,' said the thief, who was getting fed up with this. 'Yeah, well, you have been, haven't you? Great steaming elephant turds!'
   Mort had just stepped backwards again. Through a wall.
   The leading thief glared at the solid stone that had swallowed Mort, and then threw down his knife.
   'Well, f… me,' he said. 'A f…ing wizard. Ihatef…ing wizards!'
   'You shouldn't f… them, then,' muttered one of his henchmen, effortlessly pronouncing a row of dashes.
   The third member of the trio, who was a little slow of thinking, said, 'Hey, he walked through the wall!'
   'And we bin following him for ages, too,' muttered the second one. 'Fine one you are, Pilgarlic. I said I thought he was a wizard, only wizards'd walk round here by themselves. Dint I say he looked like a wizard? I said—'
   'You're saying a good deal too much,' growled the leader.
   'I saw him, he walked right through the wall there—'
   'Oh, yeah?'
   'Yeah!'
   'Right through it, dint you see?'
   'Think you're sharp, do you?'
   'Sharp enough, come to that!'
   The leader scooped his knife out of the dirt in one snaky movement.
   'Sharp as this?'
   The third thief lurched over to the wall and kicked it hard a few times, while behind him there were the sounds of scuffle and some damp bubbling noises.
   'Yep, it's a wall okay,' he said. That's a wall if ever I saw one. How d'you think they do it, lads?'
   'Lads?'
   He tripped over the prone bodies.
   'Oh,' he said. Slow as his mind was, it was quick enough to realize something very important. He was in a back alley in The Shades, and he was alone. He ran for it, and got quite a long way.

   Death walked slowly across tiles in the life-timer room, inspecting the serried rows of busy hourglasses. Albert followed dutifully behind with the great ledger open in his arms.
   The sound roared around them, a vast grey waterfall of noise.
   It came from the shelves where, stretching away into the infinite distance, row upon row of hourglasses poured away the sands of mortal time. It was a heavy sound, a dull sound, a sound that poured like sullen custard over the bright roly-poly pudding of the soul.
   VERY WELL, said Death at last. I MAKE IT THREE. A QUIET NIGHT.
   'That'd be Goodie Hamstring, the Abbott Lobsang again, and this Princess Keli,' said Albert.
   Death looked at the three hourglasses in his hand.
   I WAS THINKING OF SENDING THE LAD OUT, he said.
   Albert consulted his ledger. 'Well, Goodie wouldn't be any trouble and the Abbott is what you might call experienced,' he said. 'Shame about the princess. Only fifteen. Could be tricky.'
   YES. IT IS A PITY.
   'Master?'
   Death stood with the third glass in his hand, staring thoughtfully at the play of light across its surface. He sighed.
   ONE SO YOUNG. . . .
   'Are you feeling all right, master?' said Albert, his voice full of concern.
   TIME LIKE AN EVER-ROLLING STREAM BEARS ALL ITS. . . .
   'Master!'
   WHAT? said Death, snapping out of it.
   'You've been overdoing it, master, that's what it is—'
   WHAT ARE YOU BLATHERING ABOUT, MAN?
   'You had a bit of a funny turn there, master.'
   NONSENSE. I HAVE NEVER FELT BETTER. NOW, WHAT WERE WE TALKING ABOUT?
   Albert shrugged, and peered down at the entries in the book.
   'Goodie's a witch,' he said. 'She might get a bit annoyed if you send Mort.'
   All practitioners of magic earned the right, once their own personal sands had run out, of being claimed by Death himself rather than his minor functionaries.
   Death didn't appear to hear Albert. He was staring at Princess Keli's hourglass again.
   WHAT IS THAT SENSE INSIDE YOUR HEAD OF WISTFUL REGRET THAT THINGS ARE THE WAY THEY APPARENTLY ARE?
   'Sadness, master. I think. Now—'
   I AM SADNESS.
   Albert stood with his mouth open. Finally he got a grip on himself long enough to blurt out, 'Master, we were talking about Mort!'
   MORT WHO?
   'Your apprentice, master,' said Albert patiently. Tall young lad.'
   OF COURSE. WELL, WE'LL SEND HIM.
   'Is he ready to go solo, master?' said Albert doubtfully.
   Death thought about it. HE CAN DO IT, he said at last. HE'S KEEN, HE'S QUICK TO LEARN AND, REALLY, he added, PEOPLE CAN'T EXPECT TO HAVE ME RUNNING AROUND AFTER THEM ALL THE TIME.

   Mort stared blankly at the velvet wall hangings a few inches from his eyes.
   I've walked through a wall, he thought. And that's impossible.
   He gingerly moved the hangings aside to see if a door was lurking somewhere, but there was nothing but crumbling plaster which had cracked away in places to reveal some dampish but emphatically solid brickwork.
   He prodded it experimentally. It was quite clear that he wasn't going back out that way.
   'Well,' he said to the wall. 'What now?'
   A voice behind him said, 'Um. Excuse please?'
   He turned around slowly.
   Grouped around a table in the middle of the room was a Klatchian family of father, mother and half a dozen children of dwindling size. Eight pairs of round eyes were fixed on Mort. A ninth pair belonging to an aged grandparent of indeterminate sex weren't, because their owner had taken advantage of the interruption to get some elbow room at the communal rice bowl, taking the view that a boiled fish in the hand was worth any amount of unexplained manifestations, and the silence was punctuated by the sound of determined mastication.
   In one corner of the crowded room was a little shrine to Offler, the six-armed Crocodile God of Klatch. It was grinning just like Death, except of course Death didn't have a flock of holy birds that brought him news of his worshippers and also kept his teeth clean.
   Klatchians prize hospitality above all other virtues. As Mort stared the woman took another plate off the shelf behind her and silently began to fill it from the big bowl, snatching a choice cut of catfish from the ancient's hands after a brief struggle. Her kohl-rimmed eyes remained steadily on Mort, however.
   It was the father who had spoken. Mort bowed nervously.
   'Sorry,' he said. 'Er, I seem to have walked through this wall.' It was rather lame, he had to admit.
   'Please?' said the man. The woman, her bangles jangling, carefully arranged a few slices of pepper across the plate and sprinkled it with a dark green sauce that Mort was afraid he recognized. He'd tried it a few weeks before, and although it was a complicated recipe one taste had been enough to know that it was made out of fish entrails marinated for several years in a vat of shark bile. Death had said that it was an acquired taste. Mort had decided not to make the effort.
   He tried to sidle around the edge of the room towards the bead-hung doorway, all the heads turning to watch him. He tried a grin.
   The woman said: 'Why does the demon show his teeth, husband of my life?'
   The man said: 'It could be hunger, moon of my desire. Pile on more fish!'
   And the ancestor grumbled: 'I was eating that, wretched child. Woe unto the world when there is no respect for age!'
   Now the fact is that while the words entered Mort's ear in their spoken Klatchian, with all the curlicues and subtle diphthongs of a language so ancient and sophisticated that it had fifteen words meaning 'assassination' before the rest of the world had caught on to the idea of bashing one another over the head with rocks, they arrived in his brain as clear and understandable as his mother tongue.
   'I'm no demon! I'm a human!' he said, and stopped in shock as his words emerged in perfect Klatch.
   'You're a thief?' said the father. 'A murderer? To creep in thus, are you atax-gatherer?' His hand slipped under the table and came up holding a meat cleaver honed to paper thinness. His wife screamed and dropped the plate and clutched the youngest children to her.
   Mort watched the blade weave through the air, and gave in.
   'I bring you greetings from the uttermost circles of hell,' he hazarded.
   The change was remarkable. The cleaver was lowered and the family broke into broad smiles.
   'There is much luck to us if a demon visits,' beamed the father. 'What is your wish, O foul spawn of Offler's loins?'
   'Sorry?' said Mort.
   'A demon brings blessing and good fortune on the man that helps it,' said the man. 'How may we be of assistance, O evil dog's-breath of the nether pit?'
   'Well, I'm not very hungry,' said Mort, 'but if you know where I can get a fast horse, I could be in Sto Lat before sunset.'
   The man beamed and bowed. 'I know the very place, noxious extrusion of the bowels, if you would be so good as to follow me.'
   Mort hurried out after him. The ancient ancestor watched them go with a critical expression, its jowls rhythmically chewing.
   'That was what they call a demon around here?' it said. 'Offler rot this country of dampness, even their demons are third-rate, not a patch on the demons we had in the Old Country.'
   The wife placed a small bowl of rice in the folded middle pair of hands of the Offler statue (it would be gone in the morning) and stood back.
   'Husband did say that last month at theCurryGardens he served a creature who was not there,' she said. 'He was impressed.'
   Ten minutes later the man returned and, in solemn silence, placed a small heap of gold coins on the table. They represented enough wealth to purchase quite a large part of the city.
   'He had a bag of them,' he said.
   The family stared at the money for some time. The wife sighed.
   'Riches bring many problems,' she said. 'What are we to do?'
   'We return to Klatch,' said the husband firmly, 'where our children can grow up in a proper country, true to the glorious traditions of our ancient race and men do not need to work as waiters for wicked masters but can stand tall and proud. And we must leave right now, fragrant blossom of the date palm.'
   'Why so soon, O hard-working son of the desert?'
   'Because,' said the man, 'I have just sold the Patrician's champion racehorse.'

   The horse wasn't as fine or as fast as Binky, but it swept the miles away under its hooves and easily outdistanced a few mounted guards who, for some reason, appeared anxious to talk to Mort. Soon the shanty suburbs of Morpork were left behind and the road ran out into rich black earth country of the Sto plain, constructed over eons by the periodic flooding of the great slow Ankh that brought to the region prosperity, security and chronic arthritis.
   It was also extremely boring. As the light distilled from silver to gold Mort galloped across a flat, chilly landscape, chequered with cabbage fields from edge to edge. There are many things to be said about cabbages. One may talk at length about their high vitamin content, their vital iron contribution, the valuable roughage and commendable food value. In the mass, however, they lack a certain something; despite their claim to immense nutritional and moral superiority over, say, daffodils, they have never been a sight to inspire the poet's muse. Unless he was hungry, of course. It was only twenty miles to Sto Lat, but in terms of meaningless human experience it seemed like two thousand.
   There were guards on the gates of Sto Lat, although compared to the ones that patrolled Ankh they had a sheepish, amateurish look. Mort trotted past; and one of them, feeling a bit of a fool, asked him who went there.
   'I'm afraid I can't stop,' said Mort.
   The guard was new to the job, and quite keen. Guarding wasn't what he'd been led to expect. Standing around all day in chain mail with an axe on a long pole wasn't what he'd volunteered for; he'd expected excitement and challenge and a crossbow and a uniform that didn't go rusty in the rain.
   He stepped forward, ready to defend the city against people who didn't respect commands given by duly authorized civic employees. Mort considered the pike blade hovering a few inches from his face. There was getting to be too much of this.
   'On the other hand,' he said calmly, 'how would you like it if I made yon a present of this rather fine horse?'
   It wasn't hard to find the entrance to the castle. There were guards there, too, and they had crossbows and a considerably more unsympathetic outlook on life and, in any case, Mort had run out of horses. He loitered a bit until they started paying him a generous amount of attention, and then wandered disconsolately away into the streets of the little city, feeling stupid.
   After all this, after miles of brassicas and a backside that now felt like a block of wood, he didn't even know why he was there. So she'd seen him even when he was invisible? Did it mean anything? Of course it didn't. Only he kept seeing her face, and the flicker of hope in her eyes. He wanted to tell her that everything was going to be all right. He wanted to tell her about himself and everything he wanted to be. He wanted to find out which was her room in the castle and watch it all night until the light went out. And so on.
   A little later a blacksmith, whose business was in one of the narrow streets that looked out on to the castle walls, glanced up from his work to see a tall, gangling young man, rather red in the face, who kept trying to walk through the walls.
   Rather later than that a young man with a few superficial bruises on his head called in at one of the city's taverns and asked for directions to the nearest wizard.
   And it was later still that Mort turned up outside a peeling plaster house which announced itself on a blackened brass plaque to be the abode of Igneous Cutwell, DM (Unseen), Marster of the Infinit, Illuminartus, Wyzard to Princes, Gardian of the Sacred Portalls, If Out leave Maile with Mrs Nugent Next Door.
   Suitably impressed despite his pounding heart, Mort lifted the heavy knocker, which was in the shape of a repulsive gargoyle with a heavy iron ring in its mouth, and knocked twice.
   There was a brief commotion from within, the series of hasty domestic sounds that might, in a less exalted house, have been made by, say, someone shovelling the lunch plates into the sink and tidying the laundry out of sight.
   Eventually the door swung open, slowly and mysteriously.
   'You'd better pretend to be impreffed,' said the doorknocker conversationally, but hampered somewhat by the ring. 'He does it with pulleys and a bit of ftring. No good at opening-fpells, fee?'
   Mort looked at the grinning metal face. I work for a skeleton who can walk through walls, he told himself. Who am I to be surprised at anything?
   'Thank you,' he said.
   'You're welcome. Wipe your feet on the doormat, it's the boot-fcraper's day off.'
   The big low room inside was dark and shadowy and smelled mainly of incense but slightly of boiled cabbage arid elderly laundry and the kind of person who throws all his socks at the wall and wears the ones that don't stick. There was a large crystal ball with a crack in it, an astrolabe with several bits missing, a rather scuffed octogram on the floor, and a stuffed alligator hanging from the ceiling. A stuffed alligator is absolutely standard equipment in any properly-run magical establishment. This one looked as though it hadn't enjoyed it much.
   A bead curtain on the far wall was flung aside with a dramatic gesture and a hooded figure stood revealed.
   'Beneficent constellations shine on the hour of our meeting!' it boomed.
   'Which ones?' said Mort.
   There was a sudden worried silence.
   'Pardon?'
   'Which constellations would these be?' said Mort.
   'Beneficent ones,' said the figure, uncertainly. It rallied. 'Why do you trouble Igneous Cutwell, Holder of the Eight Keys, Traveller in the Dungeon Dimensions, Supreme Mage of—'
   'Excuse me,' said Mort, 'are you really?'
   'Really what?'
   'Master of the thingy, Lord High Wossname of the Sacred Dungeons?'
   Cutwell pushed back his hood with an annoyed flourish. Instead of the grey-bearded mystic Mort had expected he saw a round, rather plump face, pink and white like a pork pie, which it somewhat resembled in other respects. For example, like most pork pies, it didn't have a beard and, like most pork pies, it looked basically good-humoured.
   'In a figurative sense,' he said.
   'What does that mean?'
   'Well, it means no,' said Cutwell.
   'But you said—'
   'That was advertising,' said the wizard. 'It's a kind of magic I've been working on. What was it you were wanting, anyway?' He leered suggestively. 'A love philtre, yes? Something to encourage the young ladies?'
   'Is it possible to walk through walls?' said Mort desperately. Cutwell paused with his hand already halfway to a large bottle full of sticky liquid.
   'Using magic?'
   'Um,' said Mort, 'I don't think so.'
   Then pick very thin walls,' said Cutwell. 'Better still, use the door. The one over there would be favourite, if you've just come here to waste my time.'
   Mort hesitated, and then put the bag of gold coins on the table. The wizard glanced at them, made a little whinnying noise in the back of his throat, and reached out, Mort's hand shot across and grabbed his wrist.
   'I've walked through walls,' he said, slowly and deliberately.
   'Of course you have, of course you have,' mumbled Cutwell, not taking his eyes off the bag. He flicked the cork out of the bottle of blue liquid and took an absent-minded swig.
   'Only before I did it I didn't know that I could, and when I was doing it I didn't know I was, and now I've done it I can't remember how it was done. And I want to do it again.'
   'Why?'
   'Because,' said Mort, 'if I could walk through walls I could do anything.'
   'Very deep,' agreed Cutwell. 'Philosophical. And the name of the young lady on the other side of this wall?'
   'She's—' Mort swallowed. 'I don't know her name. Even if there is a girl,' he added haughtily, 'and I'm not saying there is.'
   'Right,' said Cutwell. He took another swig, and shuddered. 'Fine. How to walk through walls. I'll do some research. It might be expensive, though.'
   Mort carefully picked up the bag and pulled out one small gold coin.
   'A down payment,' he said, putting it on the table.
   Cutwell picked up the coin as if he expected it to go bang or evaporate, and examined it carefully.
   'I've never seen this sort of coin before,' he said accusingly. 'What's all this curly writing?'
   'It's gold, though, isn't it?' said Mort. 'I mean, you don't have to accept it—'
   'Sure, sure, it's gold,' said Cutwell hurriedly. 'It's gold all right. I just wondered where it had come from, that's all.'
   'You wouldn't believe me,' said Mort. 'What time's sunset around here?'
   'We normally manage to fit it in between night and day,' said Cutwell, still staring at the coin and taking little sips from the blue bottle. 'About now.'
   Mort glanced out of the window. The street outside already had a twilight look to it.
   'I'll be back,' he muttered, and made for the door. He heard the wizard call out something, but Mort was heading down the street at a dead run.
   He started to panic. Death would be waiting for him forty miles away. There would be a row. There would be a terrible—
   AH, BOY.
   A familiar figure stepped out from the flare around a jellied eel stall, holding a plate of winkles.
   THE VINEGAR IS PARTICULARLY PIQUANT. HELP YOURSELF, I HAVE AN EXTRA PIN.
   But, of course, just because he was forty miles away didn't mean he wasn't here as well. . . .
   And in his untidy room Cutwell turned the gold coin over and over in his fingers, muttering 'walls' to himself, and draining the bottle.
   He appeared to notice what he was doing only when there was no more to drink, at which point his eyes focused on the bottle and, through a rising pink mist, read the label which said 'Granny Weatherwax's Ramrub Invigoratore and Passion's Philtre, Onne Spoonful Onlie before bed and that Smalle'.

   'By myself?' said Mort.
   CERTAINLY. I HAVE EVERY FAITH IN YOU.
   'Gosh!'
   The suggestion put everything else out of Mort's mind, and he was rather surprised to find that he didn't feel particularly squeamish. He'd seen quite a few deaths in the last week or so, and all the horror went out of it when you knew you'd be speaking to the victim afterwards. Most of them were relieved, one or two of them were angry, but they were all glad of a few helpful words.
   THINK YOU CAN DO IT?
   'Well, sir. Yes. I think.'
   THAT'S THE SPIRIT. I'VE LEFT BlNKY BY THE HORSETROUGH ROUND THE CORNER. TAKE HIM STRAIGHT HOME WHEN YOU'VE FINISHED.
   'You're staying here, sir?' Death looked up and down the street. His eye-sockets flared.
   I THOUGHT I MIGHT STROLL AROUND A BIT, he said mysteriously. I DON'T SEEM TO FEEL QUITE RIGHT. I COULD DO WITH THE FRESH AIR. He seemed to remember something, reached into the mysterious shadows of his cloak, and pulled out three hourglasses. ALL STRAIGHTFORWARD, he said. ENJOY YOURSELF.
   He turned and strode off down the street, humming.
   'Um. Thank you,' said Mort. He held the hourglasses up to the light, noting the one that was on its very last few grains of sand.
   'Does this mean I'm in charge?' he called, but Death had turned the corner.
   Binky greeted him with a faint whinny of recognition. Mort mounted up, his heart pounding with apprehension and responsibility. His fingers worked automatically, taking the scythe out of its sheath and adjusting and locking the blade (which flashed steely blue in the night, slicing the starlight like salami). He mounted carefully, wincing at the stab from his saddlesores, but Binky was like riding a pillow. As an afterthought, drunk with delegated authority, he pulled Death's riding cloak out of its saddlebag and fastened it by its silver brooch.
   He took another look at the first hourglass, and nudged Binky with his knees. The horse sniffed the chilly air, and began to trot.
   Behind them Cutwell burst out of his doorway, accelerating down the frosty street with his robes flying out behind him.
   Now the horse was cantering, widening the distance between its hooves and the cobbles. With a swish of its tail it cleared the housetops and floated up into the chilly sky.
   Cutwell ignored it. He had more pressing things on his mind. He took a flying leap and landed full length in the freezing waters of the horsetrough, lying back gratefully among the bobbing ice splinters. After a while the water began to steam. Mort kept low for the sheer exhilaration of the speed. The sleeping countryside roared soundlessly underneath. Binky moved at an easy gallop, his great muscles sliding under his skin as easily as alligators off a sandbank, his mane whipping in Mort's face. The night swirled away from the speeding edge of the scythe, cut into two curling halves.
   They sped under the moonlight as silent as a shadow, visible only to cats and people who dabbled in things men were not meant to wot of.
   Mort couldn't remember afterwards, but very probably he laughed.
   Soon the frosty plains gave way to the broken lands around the mountains, and then the marching ranks of the Ramtops themselves raced across the world towards them. Binky put his head down and opened his stride, aiming for a pass between two mountains as sharp as goblins' teeth in the silver light. Somewhere a wolf howled.
   Mort took another look at the hourglass. Its frame was carved with oak leaves and mandrake roots, and the sand inside, even by moonlight, was pale gold. By turning the glass this way and that, he could just make out the name 'Ammeline Hamstring' etched in the faintest of lines.
   Binky slowed to a canter. Mort looked down at the roof of a forest, dusted with snow that was either early or very, very late; it could have been either, because the Ramtops hoarded their weather and doled it out with no real reference to the time of year.
   A gap opened up beneath them. Binky slowed again, wheeled around and descended towards a clearing that was white with drifted snow. It was circular, with a tiny cottage in the exact middle. If the ground around it hadn't been covered in snow, Mort would have noticed that there were no tree stumps to be seen; the trees hadn't been cut down in the circle, they'd simply been discouraged from growing there. Or had moved away.
   Candlelight spilled from one downstairs window, making a pale orange pool on the snow.
   Binky touched down smoothly and trotted across the freezing crust without sinking. He left no hoofprints, of course.
   Mort dismounted and walked towards the door, muttering to himself and making experimental sweeps with the scythe.
   The cottage roof had been built with wide eaves, to shed snow and cover the logpile. No dweller in the high Ramtops would dream of starting a winter without a logpile on three sides of the house. But there wasn't a logpile here, even though spring was still a long way off.
   There was, however, a bundle of hay in a net by the door. It had a note attached, written in big, slightly shaky capitals: FOR THEE HORS.
   It would have worried Mort if he'd let it. Someone was expecting him. He'd learned in recent days, though, that rather than drown in uncertainty it was best to surf right over the top of it. Anyway, Binky wasn't worried by moral scruples and bit straight in.
   It did leave the problem of whether to knock. Somehow, it didn't seem appropriate. Supposing no one answered, or told him to go away?
   So he lifted the thumb latch and pushed at the door. It swung inwards quite easily, without a creak.
   There was a low-ceilinged kitchen, its beams at trepanning height for Mort. The light from the solitary candle glinted off crockery on a long dresser and flagstones that had been scrubbed and polished into iridescence. The fire in the cave-like inglenook didn't add much light, because it was no more than a heap of white ash under the remains of a log. Mort knew, without being told, that it was the last log.
   An elderly lady was sitting at the kitchen table, writing furiously with her hooked nose only a few inches from the paper. A grey cat curled on the table beside her blinked calmly at Mort.
   The scythe bumped off a beam. The woman looked up.
   'Be with you in a minute,' she said. She frowned at the paper. 'I haven't put in the bit about being of sound mind and body yet, lot of foolishness anyway, no one sound in mind and body would be dead. Would you like a drink?'
   'Pardon?' said Mort. He recalled himself, and repeated 'PARDON?'
   'If you drink, that is. It's raspberry port. On the dresser. You might as well finish the bottle.'
   Mort eyed the dresser suspiciously. He felt he'd rather lost the initiative. He pulled out the hourglass and glared at it. There was a little heap of sand left.
   There's still a few minutes yet,' said the witch, without looking up.
   'How, I mean, HOW DO YOU KNOW?'
   She ignored him, and dried the ink in front of the candle, sealed the letter with a drip of wax, and tucked it under the candlestick. Then she picked up the cat.
   'Granny Beedle will be around directly tomorrow to tidy up and you're to go with her, understand? And see she lets Gammer Nutley have the pink marble washstand, she's had her eye on it for years.'
   The cat yawped knowingly.
   'I haven't, that is, I HAVEN'T GOT ALL NIGHT, YOU KNOW,' said Mort reproachfully.
   'You have, I haven't, and there's no need to shout,' said the witch. She slid off her stall and then Mort saw how bent she was, like a bow. With some difficulty she unhooked a tall pointed hat from its nail on the wall, skewered it into place on her white hair with a battery of hatpins, and grasped two walking sticks.
   She tottered across the floor towards Mort, and looked up at him with eyes as small and bright as blackcurrants.
   'Will I need my shawl? Shall I need a shawl, d'you think? No, I suppose not. I imagine it's quite warm where I'm going.' She peered closely at Mort, and frowned.
   'You're ratheryounger than I imagined,' she said. Mort said nothing. Then Goodie Hamstring said, quietly, 'You know, I don't think you're who I was expecting at all.'
   Mort cleared his throat.
   'Who were you expecting, precisely?' he said.
   'Death,' said the witch, simply. 'It's part of the arrangement, you see. One gets to know the time of one's death in advance, and one is guaranteed– personal attention.'
   'I'm it,'said Mort.
   'It?'
   'The personal attention. He sent me. I work for him. No one else would have me.' Mort paused. This was all wrong. He'd be sent home again in disgrace. His first bit of responsibility, and he'd ruined it. He could already hear people laughing at him.
   The wail started in the depths of his embarrassment and blared out like a foghorn. 'Only this is my first real job and it's all gone wrong!'
   The scythe fell to the floor with a clatter, slicing a piece off the table leg and cutting a flagstone in half.
   Goodie watched him for some time, with her head on one side. Then she said, 'I see. What is your name, young man?'
   'Mort,' sniffed Mort. 'Short for Mortimer.'
   'Well, Mort, I expect you've got an hourglass somewhere about your person,'
   Mort nodded vaguely. He reached down to his belt and produced the glass. The witch inspected it critically.
   'Still a minute or so,' she said. 'We don't have much time to lose. Just give me a moment to lock...'
   'But you don't understand!' Mort wailed. 'I'll mess it all up! I've never done this before!'
   She patted his hand. 'Neither have I,' she said. 'We can learn together. Now pick up the scythe and try to act your age, there's a good boy.'
   Against his protestations she shooed him out into the snow and followed behind him, pulling the door shut and locking it with a heavy iron key which she hung on a nail by the door.
   The frost had tightened its grip on the forest, squeezing it until the roots creaked. The moon was setting, but the sky was full of hard white stars that made the winter seem colder still. Goodie Hamstring shivered.
   'There's an old log over there,' she said conversationally. 'There's quite a good view across the valley. In the summertime, of course. I should like to sit down.'
   Mort helped her through the drifts and brushed as much snow as possible off the wood. They sat down with the hourglass between them. Whatever the view might have been in the summer, it now consisted of black rocks against a sky from which little flakes of snow were now tumbling.
   'I can't believe all this,' said Mort. 'I mean you sound as if you want to die.'
   'There's some things I shall miss,' she said. 'But it gets thin, you know. Life, I'm referring to. You can't trust your own body any more, and it's time to move on. I reckon it's about time I tried something else. Did he tell you magical folk can see him all the time?'
   'No,' said Mort, inaccurately.
   'Well, we can.'
   'He doesn't like wizards and witches much,' Mort volunteered.
   'Nobody likes a smartass,' she said with some satisfaction. 'We give him trouble, you see. Priests don't, so he likes priests.'
   'He's never said,' said Mort.
   'Ah. They're always telling folk how much better it's going to be when they're dead.We tell them it could be pretty good right here if only they'd put their minds to it.'
   Mort hesitated. He wanted to say: you're wrong, he's not like that at all, he doesn't care if people are good or bad so long as they're punctual. And kind to cats, he added.
   But he thought better of it. It occurred to him that people needed to believe things.
   The wolf howled again, so near that Mort looked around apprehensively. Another one across the valley answered it. The chorus was picked up by a couple of others in the depths of the forest. Mort had never heard anything so mournful.
   He glanced sideways at the still figure of Goodie Hamstring and then, with mounting panic, at the hourglass. He sprang to his feet, snatched up the scythe, and brought it around in a two-handed swing.
   The witch stood up, leaving her body behind.
   'Well done,' she said. 'I thought you'd missed it, for a minute, there.'
   Mort leaned against a tree, panting heavily, and watched Goodie walk around the log to look at herself.
   'Hmm,' she said critically. 'Time has got a lot to answer for.' She raised her hand and laughed to see the stars through it.
   Then she changed. Mort had seen this happen before, when the soul realized it was no longer bound by the body's morphic field, but never under such control. Her hair unwound itself from its tight bun, changing colour and lengthening. Her body straightened up. Wrinkles dwindled and vanished. Her grey woollen dress moved like the surface of the sea and ended up tracing entirely different and disturbing contours.
   She looked down, giggled, and changed the dress into something leaf-green and clingy.
   'What do you think, Mort?' she said. Her voice had sounded cracked and quavery before. Now it suggested musk and maple syrup and other things that set Mort's adam's apple bobbing like a rubber ball on an elastic band.
   '. . .' he managed, and gripped the scythe until his knuckles went white.
   She walked towards him like a snake in a four-wheel drift.
   'I didn't hear you,' she purred.
   'V-v-very nice,' he said. 'Is that who you were?'
   'It's who I've always been.'
   'Oh.' Mort stared at his feet. 'I'm supposed to take you away,' he said.
   'I know,' she said, 'but I'm going to stay.'
   'You can't do that! I mean—' he fumbled for words – 'you see, if you stay you sort of spread out and get thinner, until —'
   'I shall enjoy it,' she said firmly. She leaned forward and gave him a kiss as insubstantial as a mayfly's sigh, fading as she did so until only the kiss was left, just like a Cheshire cat only much more erotic.
   'Have a care, Mort,' said her voice in his head. 'You may want to hold on to your job, but will you ever be able to let go?'
   Mort stood idiotically holding his cheek. The trees around the clearing trembled for a moment, there was the sound of laughter on the breeze, and then the freezing silence closed in again.
   Duty called out to him through the pink mists in his head. He grabbed the second glass and stared at it. The sand was nearly all gone.
   The glass itself was patterned with lotus petals. When Mort flicked it with his finger it went 'Ommm'.
   He ran across the crackling snow to Binky and hurled himself into the saddle. The horse threw up his head, reared, and launched itself towards the stars.

   Great silent streamers of blue and green flame hung from the roof of the world. Curtains of octarine glow danced slowly and majestically over the Disc as the fire of the Aurora Coriolis, the vast discharge of magic from the Disc's standing field, earthed itself in the green ice mountains of the Hub.
   The central spire of Cori Celesti, home of the gods, was a ten mile high column of cold coruscating fire.
   It was a sight seen by few people, and Mort wasn't one of them, because he lay low over Binky's neck and clung on for his life as they pounded through the night sky ahead of a comet trail of steam.
   There were other mountains clustered around Cori. By comparison they were no more than termite mounds, although in reality each one was a majestic assortment of cols, ridges, faces, cliffs, screes and glaciers that any normal mountain range would be happy to associate with.
   Among the highest of them, at the end of a funnel-shaped valley, dwelt the Listeners.
   They were one of the oldest of the Disc's religious sects, although even the gods themselves were divided as to whether Listening was really a proper religion, and all that prevented their temple being wiped out by a few well-aimed avalanches was the fact that even the gods were curious as to what it was that the Listeners might Hear. If there's one thing that really annoys a god, it's not knowing something.
   It'll take Mort several minutes to arrive. A row of dots would fill in the time nicely, but the reader will already be noticing the strange shape of the temple– curled like a great white ammonite at the end of the valley – and will probably want an explanation.
   The fact is that the Listeners are trying to work out precisely what it was that the Creator said when He made the universe.
   The theory is quite straightforward.
   Clearly, nothing that the Creator makes could ever be destroyed, which means that the echoes of those first syllables must still be around somewhere, bouncing and rebounding off all the matter in the cosmos but still audible to a really good listener.
   Eons ago the Listeners had found that ice and chance had carved this one valley into the perfect acoustic opposite of an echo valley, and had built their multi-chambered temple in the exact position that the one comfy chair always occupies in the home of a rabid hi-fi fanatic. Complex baffles caught and amplified the sound that was funnelled up the chilly valley, steering it ever inwards to the central chamber where, at any hour of the day or night, three monks always sat.
   Listening.
   There were certain problems caused by the fact that they didn't hear only the subtle echoes of the first words, but every other sound made on the Disc. In order to recognize the sound of the Words, they had to learn to recognize all the other noises. This called for a certain talent, and a novice was only accepted for training if he could distinguish by sound alone, at a distance of a thousand yards, which side a dropped coin landed. He wasn't actually accepted into the order until he could tell what colour it was.
   And although the Holy Listeners were so remote, many people took the extremely long and dangerous path to their temple, traveling through frozen, troll-haunted lands, fording swift icy rivers, climbing forbidding mountains, trekking across inhospitable tundra, in order to climb the narrow stairway that led into the hidden valley and seek with an open heart the secrets of being.
   And the monks would cry unto them, 'Keep the bloody noise down!'
   Binky came through the mountain tops like a white blur, touching down in the snowy emptiness of a courtyard made spectral by the disco light from the sky. Mort leapt from his back and ran through the silent cloisters to the room where the 88th abbot lay dying, surrounded by his devout followers.
   Mort's footsteps boomed as he hurried across the intricate mosaic floor. The monks themselves wore woollen overshoes.
   He reached the bed and waited for a moment, leaning on the scythe, until he could get his breath back.
   The abbot, who was small and totally bald and had more wrinkles than a sackful of prunes, opened his eyes.
   'You're late,' he whispered, and died.
   Mort swallowed, fought for breath, and brought the scythe around in a slow arc. Nevertheless, it was accurate enough; the abbot sat up, leaving his corpse behind.
   'Not a moment too soon,' he said, in a voice only Mort could hear. 'You had me worried for a moment there.'
   'Okay?' said Mort. 'Only I've got to rush—'
   The abbot swung himself off the bed and walked towards Mort through the ranks of his bereaved followers.
   'Don't rush off,' he said. 'I always look forward to these talks. What's happened to the usual fellow?'
   'Usual fellow?' said Mort, bewildered.
   'Tall chap. Black cloak. Doesn't get enough to eat, by the look of him,' said the abbot.
   'Usual fellow? You meanDeath?' said Mort.
   'That's him,' said the abbot, cheerfully. Mort's mouth hung open.
   'Die a lot, do you?' he managed.
   'A fair bit. A fair bit. Of course,' said the abbot, 'once you get the hang of it, it's only a matter of practice.'
   'It is?'
   'We must be off,' said the abbot. Mort's mouth snapped shut.
   'That's what I've been trying to say,' he said.
   'So if you could just drop me off down in the valley,' the little monk continued placidly. He swept past Mort and headed for the courtyard. Mort stared at the floor for a moment, and then ran after him in a way which he knew to be extremely unprofessional and undignified.
   'Now look—' he began.
   'The other one had a horse called Binky, I remember,' said the abbot pleasantly. 'Did you buy the round off him?'
   The round?' said Mort, now completely lost.
   'Or whatever. Forgive me,' said the abbot, 'I don't really know how these things are organized, lad.'
   'Mort,' said Mort, absently. 'And I think you're supposed to come back with me, sir. If you don't mind,' he added, in what he hoped was a firm and authoritative manner. The monk turned and smiled pleasantly at him.
   'I wish I could,' he said. 'Perhaps one day. Now, if you could give me a lift as far as the nearest village, I imagine I'm being conceived about now.'
   'Conceived? But you've just died!' said Mort.
   'Yes, but, you see, I have what you might call a season ticket,' the abbot explained.
   Light dawned on Mort, but very slowly.
   'Oh,' he said, 'I've read about this. Reincarnation, yes?'
   'That's the word. Fifty-three times so far. Or fifty-four.'
   Binky looked up as they approached and gave a short neigh of recognition when the abbot patted his nose. Mort mounted up and helped the abbot up behind him.
   'It must be very interesting,' he said, as Binky climbed away from the temple. On the absolute scale of small talk this comment must rate minus quite a lot, but Mort couldn't think of anything better.
   'No, it mustn't,' said the abbot. 'You think it must be because you believe I can remember all my lives, but of course I can't. Not while I'm alive, anyway.'
   'I hadn't thought of that,' Mort conceded.
   'Imagine toilet training fifty times.'
   'Nothing to look back on, I imagine,' said Mort.
   'You're right. If I had my time all over again I wouldn't reincarnate. And just when I'm getting the hang of things, the lads come down from the temple looking for a boy conceived at the hour the old abbot died. Talk about unimaginative. Stop here a moment, please.'
   Mort looked down.
   'We're in mid-air,' he said doubtfully.
   'I won't keep you a minute.' The abbot slid down from Binky's back, walked a few steps on thin air, and shouted.
   It seemed to go on for a long time. Then the abbot climbed back again.
   'You don't know how long I've been looking forward to that,' he said.
   There was a village in a lower valley a few miles from the temple, which acted as a sort of service industry. From the air it was a random scattering of small but extremely well-soundproofed huts.
   'Anywhere will do,' the abbot said. Mort left him standing a few feet above the snow at a point where the huts appeared to be thickest.
   'Hope the next lifetime improves,' he said. The abbot shrugged.
   'One can always hope,' he said. 'I get a nine-month break, anyway. The scenery isn't much, but at least it's in the warm.'
   'Goodbye, then,' said Mort. 'I've got to rush.'
   'Au revoir,' said the abbot, sadly, and turned away.
   The fires of the Hub Lights were still casting their flickering illumination across the landscape. Mort sighed, and reached for the third glass.
   The container was silver, decorated with small crowns. There was hardly any sand left.
   Mort, feeling that the night had thrown everything at him and couldn't get any worse, turned it around carefully to get a glimpse of the name. . . .
   Princess Keli awoke.
   There had been a sound like someone making no noise at all. Forget peas and mattresses– sheer natural selection had established over the years that the royal families that survived longest were those whose members could distinguish an assassin in the dark by the noise he was clever enough not to make, because, in court circles, there was always someone ready to cut the heir with aknife.
   She lay in bed, wondering what to do next. There was a dagger under her pillow. She started to slide one hand up the sheets, while peering around the room with half-closed eyes in search of unfamiliar shadows. She was well aware that if she indicated in any way that she was not asleep she would never wake up again.
   Some light came into the room from the big window at the far end, but the suits of armour, tapestries and assorted paraphernalia that littered the room could have provided cover for an army.
   The knife had dropped down behind the bed head. She probably wouldn't have used it properly anyway.
   Screaming for the guards, she decided, was not a good idea. If there was anyone in the room then the guards must have been overpowered, or at least stunned by a large sum of money.
   There was a warming pan on the flagstones by the fire. Would it make a weapon?
   There was a faint metallic sound.
   Perhaps screaming wouldn't be such a bad idea after all. . . .
   The window imploded. For an instant Keli saw, framed against a hell of blue and purple flames, a hooded figure crouched on the back of the largest horse she had ever seen.
   Therewas someone standing by the bed, with a knife half raised.
   In slow motion, she watched fascinated as the arm went up and the horse galloped at glacier speed across the floor. Now the knife was above her, starting its descent, and the horse was rearing and the rider was standing in the stirrups and swinging some sort of weapon and its blade tore through the slow air with a noise like a finger on the rim of a wet glass—
   The light vanished. There was a soft thump on the floor, followed by a metallic clatter.
   Keli took a deep breath.
   A hand was briefly laid across her mouth and a worried voice said, 'If you scream, I'll regret it. Please? I'm in enough trouble as it is.'
   Anyone who could get that amount of bewildered pleading into their voice was either genuine or such a good actor they wouldn't have to bother with assassination for a living. She said, 'Who are you?'
   'I don't know if I'm allowed to tell you,' said the voice. 'You are still alive, aren't you?'
   She bit down the sarcastic reply just in time. Something about the tone of the question worried her.
   'Can't you tell?' she said.
   'It's not easy. . . .' There was a pause. She strained to see in the darkness, to put a face around that voice. 'I may have done you some terrible harm,' it added.
   'Haven't you just saved my life?'
   'I don't know what I have saved, actually. Is there some light around here?'
   The maid sometimes leaves matches on the mantelpiece,' said Keli. She felt the presence beside her move away. There were a few hesitant footsteps, a couple of thumps, and finally a clang, although the word isn't sufficient to describe the real ripe cacophony of falling metal that filled the room. It was even followed by the traditional little tinkle a couple of seconds after you thought it was all over.
   The voice said, rather indistinctly, 'I'm under a suit of armour. Where should I be?'
   Keli slid quietly out of bed, felt her way towards the fireplace, located the bundle of matches by the faint light from the dying fire, struck one in a burst of sulphurous smoke, lit a candle, found the pile of dismembered armour, pulled its sword from its scabbard and then nearly swallowed her tongue.
   Someone had just blown hot and wetly in her ear.
   That's Binky,' said the heap. 'He's just trying to be friendly. I expect he'd like some hay, if you've got any.'
   With royal self-control, Keli said, This is the fourth floor. It's a lady's bedroom. You'd be amazed at how many horses we don't get up here.'
   'Oh. Could you help me up, please?'
   She put the sword down and pulled aside a breastplate. A thin white face stared back at her.
   'First, you'd better tell me why I shouldn't send for the guards anyway,' she said. 'Even being in my bedroom could get you tortured to death.'
   She glared at him.
   Finally he said, 'Well– could you let my hand free, please? Thank you – firstly, the guards probably wouldn't see me, secondly, you'll never find out why I'm here and you look as though you'd hate not to know, and thirdly. . . .'
   Thirdly what?' she said.
   His mouth opened and shut. Mort wanted to say: thirdly, you're so beautiful, or at least very attractive, or anyway far more attractive than any other girl I've ever met, although admittedly I haven't met very many. From this it will be seen that Mort's innate honesty will never make him a poet; if Mort ever compared a girl to a summer's day, it would be followed by a thoughtful explanation of what day he had in mind and whether it was raining at the time. In the circumstances, it was just as well that he couldn't find his voice.
   Keli held up the candle and looked at the window.
   It was whole. The stone frames were unbroken. Every pane, with its stained-glass representatives of the Sto Lat coat of arms, was complete. She looked back at Mort.
   'Never mind thirdly,' she said, 'let's get back to secondly.'
   An hour later dawn reached the city. Daylight on the Disc flows rather than rushes, because light is slowed right down by the world's standing magical field, and it rolled across the flat lands like a golden sea. The city on the mound stood out like a sandcastle in the tide for a moment, until the day swirled around it and crept onwards.
   Mort and Keli sat side by side on her bed. The hourglass lay between them. There was no sand left in the top bulb.
   From outside came the sounds of the castle waking up.
   'I still don't understand this,' she said. 'Does it mean I'm dead, or doesn't it?'
   'It means you ought to be dead,' he said, 'according to fate or whatever. I haven't really studied the theory,'
   'And you should have killed me?'
   'No! I mean, no, the assassin should have killed you. I did try to explain all that,' said Mort.
   'Why didn't you let him?'
   Mort looked at her in horror.
   'Did youwant to die?'
   'Of course I didn't. But it looks as though what people want doesn't come into it, does it? I'm trying to be sensible about this.'
   Mort stared at his knees. Then he stood up.
   'I think I'd better be going,' he said coldly.
   He folded up the scythe and stuck it into its sheath behind the saddle. Then he looked at the window.
   'You came through that,' said Keli, helpfully. 'Look, when I said—'
   'Does it open?'
   'No. There's a balcony along the passage. But people will see you!'
   Mort ignored her, pulled open the door and led Binky out into the corridor. Keli ran after them. A maid stopped, curtsied, and frowned slightly as her brain wisely dismissed the sight of a very large horse walking along the carpet.
   The balcony overlooked one of the inner courtyards. Mort glanced over the parapet, and then mounted.
   'Watch out for the duke,' he said. 'He's behind all this.'
   'My father always warned me about him,' said the princess. 'I've got a food taster.'
   'You should get a bodyguard as well,' said Mort. 'I must go. I have important things to do. Farewell,' he added, in what he hoped was the right tone of injured pride.
   'Shall I see you again?' said Keli. 'There's lots I want to—'
   'That might not be a good idea, if you think about it,' said Mort haughtily. He clicked his tongue, and Binky leapt into the air, cleared the parapet and cantered up into the blue morning sky.
   'I wanted to say thank you!' Keli yelled after him.
   The maid, who couldn't get over the feeling that something was wrong and had followed her, said, 'Are you all right, ma'am?'
   Keli looked at her distractedly.
   'What?' she demanded.
   'I just wondered if– everything was all right?'
   Keli's shoulders sagged.
   'No,' she said. 'Everything's all wrong. There's a dead assassin in my bedroom. Could you please have something done about it?
   'And—' she held up a hand – 'I don't want you to say "Dead, ma'am?" or "Assassin, ma'am?" or scream or anything, I just want you to get something done about it. Quietly. I think I've got a headache. So just nod.'
   The maid nodded, bobbed uncertainly, and backed away.
   Mort wasn't sure how he got back. The sky simply changed from ice blue to sullen grey as Binky eased himself into the gap between dimensions. He didn't land on the dark soil of Death's estate, it was simplythere, underfoot, as though an aircraft carrier had gently manoeuvred itself under a jump jet to save the pilot all the trouble of touching down.
   The great horse trotted into the stableyard and halted outside the double door, swishing his tail. Mort slid off and ran for the house.
   And stopped, and ran back, and filled the hayrack, and ran for the house, and stopped and muttered to himself and ran back and rubbed the horse down and checked the water bucket, and ran for the house, and ran back and fetched the horse blanket down from its hook on the wall and buckled it on. Binky gave him a dignified nuzzle.
   No one seemed to be about as Mort slipped in by the back door and made his way to the library, where even at this time of night the air seemed to be made of hot dry dust. It seemed to take years to locate Princess Keli's biography, but he found it eventually. It was a depressingly slim volume on a shelf only reachable by the library ladder, a wheeled rickety structure that strongly resembled an early siege engine.
   With trembling fingers he opened it at the last page, and groaned.
   'The princess's assassination at the age of fifteen,' he read, 'was followed by the union of Sto Lat with Sto Helit and, indirectly, the collapse of the city states of the central plain and the rise of—'
   He read on, unable to stop. Occasionally he groaned again.
   Finally he put the book back, hesitated, and then shoved it behind a few other volumes. He could still feel it there as he climbed down the ladder, shrieking its incriminating existence to the world.
   There were few ocean-going ships on the Disc. No captain liked to venture out of sight of a coastline. It was a sorry fact that ships which looked from a distance as though they were going over the edge of the world weren't in fact disappearing over the horizon, they were in fact dropping over the edge of the world.
   Every generation or so a few enthusiastic explorers doubted this and set out to prove it wrong. Strangely enough, none of them had ever come back to announce the result of their researches.
   The following analogy would, therefore, have been meaningless to Mort.
   He felt as if he'd been shipwrecked on theTitanic but in the nick of time had been rescued. By theLusitonia.
   He felt as though he'd thrown a snowball on the spur of the moment and watched the ensuing avalanche engulf three ski resorts.
   He felt history unravelling all around him.
   He felt he needed someone to talk to, quickly.
   That had to mean either Albert or Ysabell, because the thought of explaining everything to those tiny blue pinpoints was not one he cared to contemplate after a long night. On the rare occasions Ysabell deigned to look in his direction she made it clear that the only difference between Mort and a dead toad was the colour. As for Albert. . . .
   All right, not the perfect confidant, but definitely the best in a field of one.
   Mort slid down the steps and threaded his way back through the bookshelves. A few hours' sleep would be a good idea, too.
   Then he heard a gasp, the brief patter of running feet, and the slam of a door. When he peered around the nearest bookcase there was nothing there except a stool with a couple of books on it. He picked one up and glanced at the name, then read a few pages. There was a damp lace handkerchief lying next to it.

   Mort rose late, and hurried towards the kitchen expecting at any moment the deep tones of disapproval. Nothing happened.
   Albert was at the stone sink, gazing thoughtfully at his chip pan, probably wondering whether it was time to change the fat or let it bide for another year. He turned as Mort slid into a chair.
   'You had a busy turn of it, then,' he said. 'Gallivanting all over the place until all hours, I heard. I could do you an egg. Or there's porridge.'
   'Egg, please,' said Mort. He'd never plucked up the courage to try Albert's porridge, which led a private life of its own in the depths of its saucepan and ate spoons.
   'The master wants to see you after,' Albert added, 'but he said you wasn't to rush.'
   'Oh.' Mort stared at the table. 'Did he say anything else?'
   'He said he hadn't had an evening off in a thousand years,' said Albert. 'He was humming. I don't like it. I've never seen him like this.'
   'Oh.' Mort took the plunge. 'Albert, have you been here long?'
   Albert looked at him over the top of his spectacles.
   'Maybe,' he said. 'It's hard to keep track of outside time, boy. I bin here since just after the old king died.'
   'Which king, Albert?'
   'Artorollo, I think he was called. Little fat man. Squeaky voice. I only saw him the once, though.'
   'Where was this?'
   'In Ankh, of course.'
   'What?' said Mort. They don't have kings in Ankh-Morpork, everyone knows that!'
   'This was back a bit, I said,' said Albert. He poured himself a cup of tea from Death's personal teapot and sat down, a dreamy look in his crusted eyes. Mort waited expectantly.
   'And they was kings in those days, real kings, not like the sort you get now. They wasmonarchs,' continued Albert, carefully pouring some tea into his saucer and fanning it primly with the end of his muffler. 'I mean, they was wise and fair, well, fairly wise. And they wouldn't think twice about cutting your head off soon as look at you,' he added approvingly. 'And all the queens were tall and pale and wore them balaclava helmet things—'
   'Wimples?' said Mort.
   'Yeah, them, and the princesses were beautiful as the day is long and so noble they, they could pee through a dozen mattresses—'
   'What?'
   Albert hesitated. 'Something like that, anyway,' he conceded. 'And there was balls and tournaments and executions. Great days.' He smiled dreamily at his memories.
   'Not like the sort of days you get now,' he said, emerging from his reverie with bad grace.
   'Have you got any other names, Albert?' said Mort. But the brief spell had been broken and the old man wasn't going to be drawn.
   'Oh, I know,' he snapped, 'get Albert's name and you'll go and look him up in the library, won't you? Prying and poking. I know you, skulking in there at all hours reading the lives of young wimmen—'
   The heralds of guilt must have flourished their tarnished trumpets in the depths of Mort's eyes, because Albert cackled and prodded him with a bony finger.
   'You might at least put them back where you find 'em,' he said, 'not leave piles of 'em around for old Albert to put back. Anyway, it's not right, ogling the poor dead things. It probably turns you blind.'
   'But I only—' Mort began, and remembered the damp lace handkerchief in his pocket, and shut up.
   He left Albert grumbling to himself and doing the washing up, and slipped into the library. Pale sunlight lanced down from the high windows, gently fading the covers on the patient, ancient volumes. Occasionally a speck of dust would catch the light as it floated through the golden shafts, and flare like a miniature supernova.
   Mort knew that if he listened hard enough he could hear the insect-like scritching of the books as they wrote themselves.
   Once upon a time Mort would have found it eerie. Now it was– reassuring. It demonstrated that the universe was running smoothly. His conscience, which had been looking for the opening, gleefully reminded him that, all right, it might be running smoothly but it certainly wasn't heading in the right direction.
   He made his way through the maze of shelves to the mysterious pile of books, and found it was gone. Albert had been in the kitchen, and Mort had never seen Death himself enter the library. What was Ysabell looking for, then?
   He glanced up at the cliff of shelves above him, and his stomach went cold when he thought of what was starting to happen. . . .
   There was nothing for it. He'd have to tell someone.

   Keli, meanwhile, was also finding life difficult.
   This was because causality had an incredible amount of inertia. Mort's misplaced thrust, driven by anger and desperation and nascent love, had sent it down a new track but it hadn't noticed yet. He'd kicked the tail of the dinosaur, but it would be some time before the other end realized it was time to say 'ouch'.
   Bluntly, the universe knew Keli was dead and was therefore rather surprised to find that she hadn't stopped walking and breathing yet.
   It showed it in little ways. The courtiers who gave her furtive odd looks during the morning would not have been able to say why the sight of her made them feel strangely uncomfortable. To their acute embarrassment and her annoyance they found themselves ignoring her, or talking in hushed voices.
   The Chamberlain found he'd instructed that the royal standard be flown at half mast and for the life of him couldn't explain why. He was gently led off to his bed with a mild nervous affliction after ordering a thousand yards of black bunting for no apparent reason.
   The eerie, unreal feeling soon spread throughout the castle. The head coachman ordered the state bier to be brought out again and polished, and then stood in the stable yard and wept into his chamois leather because he couldn't remember why. Servants walked softly along the corridors. The cook had to fight an overpowering urge to prepare simple banquets of cold meat. Dogs howled and then stopped, feeling rather stupid. The two black stallions who traditionally pulled the Sto Lat funeral cortege grew restive in their stalls and nearly kicked a groom to death.
   In his castle in Sto Helit, the duke waited in vain for a messenger who had in fact set out, but had stopped halfway down the street, unable to remember what it was he was supposed to be doing.
   Through all this Keli moved like a solid and increasingly more irritated ghost.
   Things came to a head at lunchtime. She swept into the great hall and found no place had been set in front of the royal chair. By speaking loudly and distinctly to the butler she managed to get that rectified, then saw dishes being passed in front of her before she could get a fork into them. She watched in sullen disbelief as the wine was brought in and poured first for the Lord of the Privy Closet.
   It was an unregal thing to do, but she stuck out a foot and tripped the wine waiter. He stumbled, muttered something under his breath, and stared down at the flagstones.
   She leaned the other way and shouted into the ear of the Yeoman of the Pantry: 'Can you see me, man? Why are we reduced to eating cold pork and ham?'
   He turned aside from his hushed conversation with the Lady of the Small Hexagonal Room in the North Turret, gave her a long look in which shock made way for a sort of unfocused puzzlement, and said, 'Why, yes . . . I can . . . er. . . .'
   'Your Royal Highness,' prompted Keli.
   'But . . . yes . . . Highness,' he muttered. There was a heavy pause.
   Then, as if switched back on, he turned his back on her and resumed his conversation.
   Keli sat for a while, white with shock and anger, then pushed the chair back and stormed away to her chambers. A couple of servants sharing a quick rollup in the passage outside were knocked sideways by something they couldn't quite see.
   Keli ran into her room and hauled on the rope that should have sent the duty maid running in from the sitting room at the end of the corridor. Nothing happened for some time, and then the door was pushed open slowly and a face peered in at her.
   She recognized the look this time, and was ready for it. She grabbed the maid by the shoulders and hauled her bodily into the room, slamming the door shut behind her. As the frightened woman stared everywhere but at Keli she hauled off and fetched her a stinging slap across the cheek.
   'Did you feel that? Did you feel it?' she shrieked.
   'But . . . you . . .' the maid whimpered, staggering backwards until she hit the bed and sitting down heavily on it.
   'Look at me! Look at me when I talk to you!' yelled Keli, advancing on her. 'You can see me, can't you? Tell me you can see me or I'll have you executed!'
   The maid stared into her terrified eyes.
   'I can see you,' she said, 'but. . . .'
   'But what? But what?'
   'Surely you're . . . I heard . . . I thought. . . .'
   'What did you think?' snapped Keli. She wasn't shouting any more. Her words came out like white-hot whips.
   The maid collapsed into a sobbing heap. Keli stood tapping her foot for a moment, and then shook the woman gently.
   'Is there a wizard in the city?' she said. 'Look at me,at me. There's a wizard, isn't there? You girls are always skulking off to talk to wizards! Where does he live?'
   The woman turned a tear-stained face towards her, fighting against every instinct that told her the princess didn't exist.
   'Uh . . . wizard, yes . . . Cutwell, in Wall Street.
   Keli's lips compressed into a thin smile. She wondered where her cloaks were kept, but cold reason told her it was going to be a damn sight easier to find them herself than try to make her presence felt to the maid. She waited, watching closely, as the woman stopped sobbing, looked around her in vague bewilderment, and hurried out of the room.
   She's forgotten me already, she thought. She looked at her hands. She seemed solid enough.
   It had to be magic.
   She wandered into her robing room and experimentally opened a few cupboards until she found a black cloak and hood. She slipped them on and darted out into the corridor and down the servants' stairs.
   She hadn't been this way since she was little. This was the world of linen cupboards, bare floors and dumb-waiters. It smelled of slightly stale crusts.
   Keli moved through it like an earthbound spook. She was aware of the servants' quarters, of course, in the same way that people are aware at some level in their minds of the drains or the guttering, and she would be quite prepared to concede that although servants all looked pretty much alike they must have some distinguishing features by which their nearest and dearest could, presumably, identify them. But she was not prepared for sights like Moghedron the wine butler, whom she had hitherto seen only as a stately presence moving like a galleon under full sail, sitting in his pantry with his jacket undone and smoking a pipe.
   A couple of maids ran past her without a second glance, giggling. She hurried on, aware that in some strange way she was trespassing in her own castle.
   And that, she realized, was because it wasn't her castle at all. The noisy world around her, with its steaming laundries and chilly stillrooms, was its own world. She couldn't own it. Possibly it owned her.
   She took a chicken leg from the table in the biggest kitchen, a cavern lined with so many pots that by the light of its fires it looked like an armoury for tortoises, and felt the unfamiliar thrill of theft. Theft! In her own kingdom! And the cook looked straight through her, eyes as glazed as jugged ham.
   Keli ran across the stable yards and out of the back gate, past a couple of sentries whose stern gaze quite failed to notice her.
   Out in the streets it wasn't so creepy, but she still felt oddly naked. It was unnerving, being among people who were going about their own affairs and not bothering to look at one, when one's entire experience of the world hitherto was that it revolved around one. Pedestrians bumped into one and rebounded away, wondering briefly what it was they had hit, and one several times had to scurry away out of the path of wagons.
   The chicken leg hadn't gone far to fill the hole left by the absence of lunch, and she filched a couple of apples from a stall, making a mental note to have the chamberlain find out how much apples cost and send some money down to the stallholder.
   Dishevelled, rather grubby and smelling slightly of horse dung, she came at last to Cutwell's door. The knocker gave her some trouble. In her experience doors opened for you; there were special people to arrange it.
   She was so distraught she didn't even notice that the knocker winked at her.
   She tried again, and thought she heard a distant crash. After some time the door opened a few inches and she caught a glimpse of a round flustered face topped with curly hair. Her right foot surprised her by intelligently inserting itself in the crack.
   'I demand to see the wizard,' she announced. 'Pray admit me this instant.'
   'He's rather busy at present,' said the face. 'Were you after a love potion?'
   'A what?'
   'I've– we've got a special on Cutwell's Shield of Passion ointment,' said the face, and winked in a startling fashion. 'Provides your wild oats while guaranteeing a crop failure, if you know what I mean.'
   Keli bridled. 'No,' she lied coldly, 'I do not.'
   'Ramrub? Maidens' Longstop? Belladonna eyedrops?'
   'I demand—'
   'Sorry, we're closed,' said the face, and shut the door. Keli withdrew her foot just in time.
   She muttered some words that would have amazed and shocked her tutors, and thumped on the woodwork.
   The tattoo of her hammering suddenly slowed as realization dawned.
   He'd seen her! He'd heard her!
   She beat on the door with renewed vigour, yelling with all the power in her lungs.
   A voice by her ear said, 'It won't work. He 'eef very ftubborn.'
   She looked around slowly and met the impertinent gaze of the doorknocker. It waggled its metal eyebrows at her and spoke indistinctly through its wrought-iron ring.
   'I am Princess Keli, heir to the throne of Sto Lat,' she said haughtily, holding down the lid on her terror. 'And I don't talk to door furniture.'
   'Fwell,I'm just a doorknocker and I can talk to fwhoever I please,' said the gargoyle pleasantly. 'And I can tell you the fmaster iff having a trying day and duff fnot fwant to be disturbed. But you could ftry to use the magic word,' it added. 'Coming from an attractiff fwoman it works nine times out of eight.'
   'Magic word? What's the magic word?'
   The knocker perceptibly sneered. 'Haff you been taught nothing, miss?'
   She drew herself up to her full height, which wasn't really worth the effort. She felt she'd had a trying day too. Her father had personally executed a hundred enemies in battle. She should be able to manage a doorknocker.
   'I have beeneducated,' she informed it with icy precision, 'by some of the finest scholars in the land.'
   The doorknocker did not appear to be impressed.
   'Iff they didn't teach you the magic word,' it said calmly, 'they couldn't haff fbeen all that fine.'
   Keli reached out, grabbed the heavy ring, and pounded it on the door. The knocker leered at her.
   'Ftreat me rough,' it lisped. 'That'f the way I like it!'
   'You're disgusting!'
   'Yeff. Ooo, that waff nife, do it again. . . .'
   The door opened a crack. There was a shadowy glimpse of curly hair.
   'Madam, I said we're cl—'
   Keli sagged.
   'Please help me,' she said. 'Please!'
   'See?' said the doorknocker triumphantly. 'Sooner or latereveryone remembers the magic word!'

   Keli had been to official functions in Ankh-Morpork and had met senior wizards from Unseen University, the Disc's premier college of magic. Some of them had been tall, and most of them had been fat, and nearly all of them had been richly dressed, or at least thought they were richly dressed.
   In fact there are fashions in wizardry as in more mundane arts, and this tendency to look like elderly aldermen was only temporary. Previous generations had gone in for looking pale and interesting, or druidical and grubby, or mysterious and saturnine. But Keli was used to wizards as a sort of fur-trimmed small mountain with a wheezy voice, and Igneous Cutwell didn't quite fit the mage image.
   He was young. Well, that couldn't be helped; presumably even wizards had to start off young. He didn't have a beard, and the only thing his rather grubby robe was trimmed with was frayed edges.
   'Would you like a drink or something?' he said, surreptitiously kicking a discarded vest under the table.
   Keli looked around for somewhere to sit that wasn't occupied with laundry or used crockery, and shook her head. Cutwell noticed her expression.
   'It's a bit alfresco, I'm afraid,' he added hurriedly, elbowing the remains of a garlic sausage on to the floor. 'Mrs Nugent usually comes in twice a week and does for me but she's gone to see her sister who's had one of her turns. Are you sure? It's no trouble. I saw a spare cup here only yesterday.'
   'I have a problem, Mr Cutwell,' said Keli.
   'Hang on a moment.' He reached up to a hook over the fireplace and took down a pointy hat that had seen better days, although from the look of it they hadn't been very much better, and then said, 'Right. Fire away.'
   'What's so important about the hat?'
   'Oh, it's very 'essential. You've got to have the proper hat for wizarding. We wizards know about this sort of thing.'
   'If you say so. Look, can you see me?'
   He peered at her. 'Yes. Yes, I would definitely say I can see you.'
   'And hear me? You can hear me, can you?'
   'Loud and clear. Yes. Every syllable tinkling into place. No problems.'
   'Then would you be surprised if I told you that no one else in this city can?'
   'Except me?'
   Keli snorted. 'And your doorknocker.'
   Cutwell pulled out a chair and sat down. He squirmed a little. A thoughtful expression passed over his face. He stood up, reached behind him and produced a flat reddish mass which might have once been half a pizza[2]. He stared at it sorrowfully.
   'I've been looking for that all morning, would you believe?' he said. 'It was an Ail-On with extra peppers, too.' He picked sadly at the squashed shape, and suddenly remembered Keli.
   'Gosh, sorry,' he said, 'where's my manners? Whatever will you think of me? Here. Have an anchovy. Please.'
   'Have you been listening to me?' snapped Keli.
   'Do you feel invisible? In yourself, I mean?' said Gutwell, indistinctly.
   'Of course not. I just feel angry. So I want you to tell my fortune.'
   'Well, I don't know about that, it all sounds rathermedical to me and—'
   'I can pay.'
   'It's illegal, you see,' said Cutwell wretchedly. 'The old king expressly forbade fortune telling in Sto Lat. He didn't like wizards much.'
   'I can pay alot.'
   'Mrs Nugent was telling me this new girl for the throne is likely to be worse. A right haughty one, she said. Not the sort to look kindly on practitioners of the subtle arts, I fear.'
   Keli smiled. Members of the court who had seen that smile before would have hastened to drag Gutwell out of the way and into a place of safety, like the next continent, but he just sat there trying to pick bits of mushroom out of his robe.
   'I understand she's got a foul temper on her,' said Keli. 'I wouldn't be surprised if she didn't turn you out of the city anyway.'
   'Oh dear,' said Cutwell, 'do you really think so?'
   'Look,' said Keli, 'you don't have to tell my future, just my present. Even she couldn't object to that. I'll have a word with her if you like,' she added magnanimously.
   Cutwell brightened. 'Oh, do you know her?' he said.
   'Yes. But sometimes, I think, not very well.'
   Cutwell sighed and burrowed around in the debris on the table, dislodging cascades of elderly plates and the long-mummified remains of several meals. Eventually he unearthed a fat leather wallet, stuck to a cheese slice.
   'Well,' he said doubtfully, 'these are Caroc cards. Distilled wisdom of the Ancients and all that. Or there's the Ching Aling of the Hublandish. It's all the rage in the smart set. I don't do tealeaves.'
   'I'll try the Ching thing.'
   'You throw these yarrow stalks in the air, then.'
   She did. They looked at the ensuing pattern.
   'Hmm,' said Cutwell after a while. 'Well, that's one in the fireplace, one in the cocoa mug, one in the street, shame about the window, one on the table, and one, no,two behind the dresser. I expect Mrs Nugent will be able to find the rest.'
   'You didn't say how hard. Shall I do it again?'
   'No-ooo, I don't think so.' Cutwell thumbed through the pages of a yellowed book that had previously been supporting the table leg. 'The pattern seems to make sense. Yes, here we are, Octogram 8,887: Illegality, the Unatoning Goose. Which we cross reference here . . . hold on . . . hold on . . . yes. Got it.'
   'Well?'
   'Without vertically, wisely the cochineal emperor goes forth at teatime; at evening the mollusc is silent among the almond blossom.'
   'Yes?' said Keli, respectfully. 'What does that mean?'
   'Unless you're a mollusc, probably not a lot,' said Cutwell. 'I think perhaps it lost something in translation.'
   'Are you sure you know how to do this?'
   'Let's try the cards,' said Cutwell hurriedly, fanning them out. 'Pick a card. Any card.'
   'It's Death,'said Keli.
   'Ah. Well. Of course, the Death card doesn't actually meandeath in all circumstances,' Cutwell said quickly.
   'You mean, it doesn't mean death in those circumstances where the subject is getting over-excited and you're too embarrassed to tell the truth, hmm?'
   'Look, take another card.'
   'This one's Death as well,' said Keli.
   'Did you put the other one back?'
   'No. Shall I take another card?'
   'May as well.'
   'Well, there's a coincidence!'
   'Death number three?'
   'Right. Is this a special pack for conjuring tricks?' Keli tried to sound composed, but even she could detect the faint tinkle of hysteria in her voice.
   Cutwell frowned at her and carefully put the cards back in the pack, shuffled it, and dealt them out on to the table. There was only one Death.
   'Oh dear,' he said, 'I think this is going to be serious. May I see the palm of your hand, please?'
   He examined it for a long time. Alter a while he went to the dresser, took a jeweller's eyeglass out of a drawer, wiped the porridge off it with the sleeve of his robe, and spent another few minutes examining her hand in minutest detail. Eventually he sat back, removed the glass, and stared at her.
   'You're dead,' he said.
   Keli waited. She couldn't think of any suitable reply. 'I'm not', lacked a certain style, while 'Is it serious?' seemed somehow too frivolous.
   'Did I say I thought this was going to be serious?' said Cutwell.
   'I think you did,' said Keli carefully, keeping her tone totally level.
   'I was right.'
   'Oh.'
   'It could be fatal.'
   'How much more fatal,' said Keli, 'than being dead?'
   'I didn't mean for you.'
   'Oh.'
   'Something very fundamental seems to have gone wrong, you see. You're dead in every sense but the, er, actual. I mean, the cards think you're dead. Your lifeline thinks you're dead. Everything and everyone thinks you're dead.'
   'I don't,' said Keli, but her voice was less than confident.
   'I'm afraid your opinion doesn't count.'
   'But people can see and hear me!'
   The first thing you learn when you enroll at Unseen University, I'm afraid, is that people don't pay much attention to that sort of thing. It's what their minds tell them that's important.'
   'You mean people don't see me because their minds tell them not to?'
   ' 'Fraid so. It's called predestination, or something.' Cutwell looked at her wretchedly. 'I'm a wizard. We know about these things.'
   'Actually it's not thefirst thing you learn when you enroll,' he added, 'I mean, you learn where the lavatories are and all that sort of thing before that. But after all that, it's the first thing.'
   'You can see me, though.'
   'Ah. Well. Wizards are specially trained to see things that are there and not to see things that aren't. You get these special exercises—'
   Keli drummed her fingers on the table, or tried to. It turned out to be difficult. She stared down in vague horror.
   Cutwell hurried forward and wiped the table with his sleeve.
   'Sorry,' he muttered, 'I had treacle sandwiches for supper last night.'
   'What can Ido?'
   'Nothing.'
   'Nothing?'
   'Well, you could certainly become a very successful burglar . . . sorry. That was tasteless of me.'
   'I thought so.'
   Cutwell patted her ineptly on the hand, and Keli was too preoccupied even to notice such flagrantles? majest?.
   'You see, everything's fixed. History is all worked out, from start to finish. What the facts actuallyare is beside the point; history just rolls straight over the top of them. You can't change anything because the changes are already part of it. You're dead. It's fated. You'll just have to accept it.'
   He gave an apologetic grin. 'You're a lot luckier than most dead people, if you look at it objectively,' he said. 'You're alive to enjoy it.'
   'I don't want to accept it. Why should I accept it? It's not my fault!'
   'You don't understand. History is moving on. You can't get involved in it any more. There isn't a part in it for you, don't you see? Best to let things take their course.' He patted her hand again. She looked at him. He withdrew his hand.
   'What am I supposed to do then?' she said. 'Not eat, because the food wasn't destined to be eaten by me? Go and live in a crypt somewhere?'
   'Bit of a poser, isn't it?' agreed Cutwell. 'That's fate for you, I'm afraid. If the world can't sense you, you don't exist. I'm a wizard. We know—'
   'Don't say it.'
   Keli stood up.
   Five generations ago one of her ancestor had halted his band of nomadic cutthroats a few miles from the mound of Sto Lat and had regarded the sleeping city with a peculiarly determined expression that said: This'll do. Just because you're born in the saddle doesn't mean you have to die in the bloody thing.
   Strangely enough, many of his distinctive features had, by a trick of heredity, been bequeathed to his present descendant[3], accounting for her rather idiosyncratic attractiveness. They were never more apparent than now. Even Cutwell was impressed. When it came to determination, you could have cracked rocks on her jaw.
   In exactly the same tone of voice that her ancestor had used when he addressed his weary, sweaty followers before the attack[4], she said:
   'No. No, I'm not going to accept it. I'm not going to dwindle into some sort of ghost. You're going to help me, wizard.'
   Cutwell's subconscious recognized that tone. It had harmonics in it that made even the woodworm in the floorboards stop what they were doing and stand to attention. It wasn't voicing an opinion, it was saying: things will be thus.
   'Me, madam?' he quavered, 'I don't see what I can possibly—'
   He was jerked off his chair and out into the street, his robes billowing around him. Keli marched towards the palace with her shoulders set determinedly, dragging the wizard behind her like a reluctant puppy. It was with such a walk that mothers used to bear down on the local school when their little boy came home with a black eye; it was unstoppable; it was like the March of Time.
   'What is it you intend?' Cutwell stuttered, horribly aware that there was going to be nothing he could do to resist, whatever it was.
   'It's your lucky day, wizard.'
   'Oh. Good,' he said weakly.
   'You've just been appointed Royal Recognizer.'
   'Oh. What does that entail, exactly?'
   'You're going to remind everyone I'm alive. It's very simple. There's three square meals a day and your laundry done. Step lively, man.'
   'Royal?'
   'You're a wizard. I think there's something you ought to know,' said the princess.

   THERE IS? said Death.
   (That was a cinematic trick adapted for print. Death wasn't talking to the princess. He was actually in his study, talking to Mort. But it was quite effective, wasn't it? It's probably called a fast dissolve, or a crosscut/zoom. Or something. An industry where a senior technician is called a Best Boy might call it anything.)
   AND WHAT IS THAT? he added, winding a bit of black silk around the wicked hook in a little vice he'd clamped to his desk.
   Mort hesitated. Mostly this was because of fear and embarrassment, but it was also because the sight of a hooded spectre peacefully tying dry flies was enough to make anyone pause.
   Besides, Ysabell was sitting on the other side of the room, ostensibly doing some needlework but also watching him through a cloud of sullen disapproval. He could feel her red-rimmed eyes boring into the back of his neck.
   Death inserted a few crow hackles and whistled a busy little tune through his teeth, not having anything else to whistle through. He looked up.
   HMM?
   They– didn't go as smoothly as I thought,' said Mort, standing nervously on the carpet in front of the desk.
   YOU HAD TROUBLE? said Death, snipping off a few scraps of feather.
   'Well, you see, the witch wouldn't come away, and the monk, well, he started out all over again.'
   THERE'S NOTHING TO WORRY ABOUT THERE, LAD—
   '— Mort —'
   — YOU SHOULD HAVE WORKED OUT BY NOW THAT EVERYONE GETS WHAT THEY THINK IS COMING TO THEM. IT'S SO MUCH NEATER THAT WAY.
   'I know, sir. But that means bad people who think they're going to some sort of paradise actually do get there. And good people who fear they're going to some kind of horrible place really suffer. It doesn't seem like justice.'
   WHAT IS IT I'VE SAID YOU MUST REMEMBER, WHEN YOU'RE OUT ON THE DUTY?
   'Well, you—'
   HMM?
   Mort stuttered into silence.
   THERE'S NO JUSTICE. THERE'S JUST YOU.
   'Well, I—'
   YOU MUST REMEMBER THAT.
   'Yes, but—'
   I EXPECT IT ALL WORKS OUT PROPERLY IN THE END. I HAVE NEVER MET THE CREATOR, BUT I'M TOLD HE'S QUITE KINDLY DISPOSED TO PEOPLE. Death snapped the thread and started to unwind the vice.
   PUT SUCH THOUGHTS OUT OF YOUR MIND, he added. AT LEAST THE THIRD ONE SHOULDN'T HAVE GIVEN YOU ANY TROUBLE.
   This was the moment. Mort had thought about it for a long time. There was no sense in concealing it. He'd upset the whole future course of history. Such things tend to draw themselves to people's attention. Best to get it off his chest. Own up like a man. Take his medicine. Cards on table. Beating about bush, none of. Mercy, throw himself on.
   The piercing blue eyes glittered at him.
   He looked back like a nocturnal rabbit trying to outstare the headlights of a sixteen-wheeled artic whose driver is a twelve-hour caffeine freak outrunning the tachometers of hell.
   He failed.
   'No, sir,'he said.
   GOOD. WELL DONE. NOW THEN, WHAT DO YOU THINK OF THIS?
   Anglers reckon that a good dry fly should cunningly mimic the real thing. There are the right flies for morning. There are different flies for the evening rise. And so on.
   But the thing between Death's triumphant digits was a fly from the dawn of time. It was the fly in the primordial soup. It had bred on mammoth turds. It wasn't a fly that bangs on window panes, it was a fly that drills through walls. It was an insect that would crawl out from between the slats of the heaviest swat dripping venom and seeking revenge. Strange wings and dangling bits stuck out all over it. It seemed to have a lot of teeth.
   'What's it called?' said Mort.
   I SHALL CALL IT– DEATH'S GLORY. Death gave the thing a final admiring glance and stuck it into the hood of his robe. I FEEL INCLINED TO SEE A LITTLE BIT OF LIFE THIS EVENING, he said. YOU CAN TAKE THE DUTY, NOW THAT YOU'VE GOT THE HANG OF IT. AS IT WERE.
   'Yes. Sir,' said Mort, mournfully. He saw his life stretching out in front of him like a nasty black tunnel with no light at the end of it.
   Death drummed his finger on the desk, muttered to himself.
   AH YES, he said. ALBERT TELLS ME SOMEONE'S BEEN MEDDLING IN THE LIBRARY.
   'Pardon, sir?'
   TAKING BOOKS OUT, LEAVING THEM LYING AROUND. BOOKS ABOUT YOUNG WOMEN. HE SEEMS TO THINK IT IS AMUSING.
   As has already been revealed, the Holy Listeners have such well developed hearing that they can be deafened by a good sunset. Just for a few seconds it seemed to Mort that the skin on the back of his neck was developing similar strange powers, because he could see Ysabell freeze in mid-stitch. He also heard the little intake of breath that he'd heard before, among the shelves. He remembered the lace handkerchief.
   He said, 'Yes, sir. It won't happen again, sir.'
   The skin on the back of his neck started to itch like fury.
   SPLENDID. NOW, YOU TWO CAN RUN ALONG. GET ALBERT TO DO YOU A PICNIC LUNCH OR SOMETHING. GET SOME FRESH AIR. I'VE NOTICED THE WAY YOU TWO ALWAYS AVOID EACH OTHER. He gave Mort a conspiratorial nudge– it was like being poked with a stick – and added, ALBERT'S TOLD ME WHAT THAT MEANS.
   'Has he?' said Mort gloomily. He'd been wrong, therewas a light at the end of the tunnel, and it was a flamethrower.
   Death gave him another of his supernova winks.
   Mort didn't return it. Instead he turned and plodded towards the door, at a general speed and gait that made Great A'Tuin look like a spring lamb.
   He was halfway along the corridor before he heard the soft rush of footsteps behind him and a hand caught his arm.
   'Mort?'
   He turned and gazed at Ysabell through a fog of depression.
   'Why did you let him think it was you in the library?'
   'Don't know.'
   'It was . . . very . . . kind of you,' she said cautiously.
   'Was it? I can't think what came over me.' He felt in his pocket and produced the handkerchief. This belongs to you, I think.'
   'Thank you.' She blew her nose noisily.
   Mort was already well down the corridor, his shoulders hunched like vulture's wings. She ran after him.
   'I say,' she said.
   'What?'
   'I wanted to say thank you.'
   'It doesn't matter,' he muttered. 'It'd just be best if you don't take books away again. It upsets them, or something.' He gave what he considered to be a mirthless laugh. 'Ha!'
   'Ha what?'
   'Just ha!'
   He'd reached the end of the corridor. There was the door into the kitchen, where Albert would be leering knowingly, and Mort decided he couldn't face that. He stopped.
   'But I only took the books for a bit of company,' she said behind him.
   He gave in.
   'We could have a walk in the garden,' he said in despair, and then managed to harden his heart a little and added, 'Without obligation, that is.'
   'You mean you're not going to marry me?' she said. Mort was horrified. 'Marry?'
   'Isn't that what father brought you here for?' she said. 'He doesn't need an apprentice, after all.'
   'You mean all those nudges and winks and little comments about some day my son all this will be yours?' said Mort. 'I tried to ignore them. I don't want to get married to anyone yet,' he added, suppressing a fleeting mental picture of the princess. 'And certainly not to you, no offence meant.'
   'I wouldn't marry you if you were the last man on the Disc,' she said sweetly.
   Mort was hurt by this. It was one thing not to want to marry someone, but quite another to be told they didn't want to marryyou.
   'At least I don't look like I've been eating doughnuts in a wardrobe for years,' he said, as they stepped out on to Death's black lawn.
   'At least I walk as if my legs only had one knee each,' she said.
   'My eyes aren't two juugly poached eggs.'
   Ysabell nodded. 'On the other hand,my ears don't look like something growing on a dead tree. What does juugly mean?'
   'You know, eggs like Albert does them.'
   'With the white all sticky and runny and full of slimy bits?'
   'Yes.'
   'A good word,' she conceded thoughtfully. 'Butmy hair, I put it to you, doesn't look like something you clean a privy with.'
   'Certainly, but neither does mine look like a wet hedgehog.'
   'Pray note that my chest does not appear to be a toast rack in a wet paper bag.'
   Mort glanced sideways at the top of Ysabell's dress, which contained enough puppy fat for two litters of Rotweilers, and forbore to comment.
   'My eyebrows don't look like a pair of mating caterpillars,' he hazarded.
   True. Butmy legs, I suggest, could at least stop a pig in a passageway.'
   'Sorry—?'
   'They're not bandy,' she explained.
   'Ah.'
   They strolled through the lily beds, temporarily lost for words. Eventually Ysabell confronted Mort and stuck out her hand. He shook it in thankful silence.
   'Enough?' she said.
   'Just about.'
   'Good. Obviously we shouldn't get married, if only for the sake of the children.'
   Mort nodded.
   They sat down on a stone seat between some neatly clipped box hedges. Death had made a pond in this corner of the garden, fed by an icy spring that appeared to be vomited into the pool by a stone lion. Fat white carp lurked in the depths, or nosed on the surface among the velvety black water lilies.
   'We should have brought some breadcrumbs,' said Mort gallantly, opting for a totally non-controversial subject.
   'He never comes out here, you know,' said Ysabell, watching the fish. 'He made it to keep me amused.'
   'It didn't work?'
   'It's not real,' she said. 'Nothing's real here. Not really real. He just likes to act like a human being. He's trying really hard at the moment, have you noticed. I think you're having an effect on him. Did you know he tried to learn the banjo once?'
   'I see him as more the organ type.'
   'He couldn't get the hang of it,' said Ysabell, ignoring him. 'He can't create, you see.'
   'You said he created this pool.'
   'It's a copy of one he saw somewhere. Everything's a copy.'
   Mort shifted uneasily. Some small insect had crawled up his leg.
   'It's rather sad,' he said, hoping that this was approximately the right tone to adopt.
   'Yes.'
   She scooped a handful of gravel from the path and began to flick it absent-mindedly into the pool.
   'Are my eyebrows that bad?' she said.
   'Um,' said Mort, 'afraid so.'
   'Oh.' Flick, flick. The carp were watching her disdainfully.
   'And my legs?' he said.
   'Yes. Sorry.'
   Mort shuffled anxiously through his limited repertoire of small talk, and gave up.
   'Never mind,' he said gallantly. 'At least you can use tweezers.'
   'He's very kind,' said Ysabell, ignoring him, 'in a sort of absent-minded way.'
   'He's not exactly your real father, is he?'
   'My parents were killed crossing the Great Nef years ago. There was a storm, I think. He found me and brought me here. I don't know why he did it.'
   'Perhaps he felt sorry for you?'
   'He never feels anything. I don't mean that nastily, you understand. It's just that he's got nothing to feel with, no whatd'youcallits, no glands. He probablythought sorry for me.'
   She turned her pale round face towards Mort.
   'I won't hear a word against him. He tries to do his best. It's just that he's always got so much to think about.'
   'My father was a bit like that. Is, I mean.'
   'I expect he's got glands, though.'
   'I imagine he has,' said Mort, shifting uneasily. 'Its not something I've ever really thought about, glands.'
   They stared side by side at the trout. The trout stared back.
   'I've just upset the entire history of the future,' said Mort.
   'Yes?'
   'You see, when he tried to kill her I killed him, but the thing is, according to the history she should have died and the duke would be king, but theworst bit, the worst bit is that although he's absolutely rotten to the core he'd unite the cities and eventually they'll be a federation and the books say there'll be a hundred years of peace and plenty. I mean, you'd think there'd be a reign of terror or something, but apparently history needs this kind of person sometimes and the princess would just be another monarch. I mean, not bad, quite good really, but just not right and now it's not going to happen and history is flapping around loose and it's all my fault.'
   He subsided, anxiously awaiting her reply.
   'You were right, you know.'
   'I was?'
   'We ought to have brought some breadcrumbs,' she said. 'I suppose they find things to eat in the water. Beetles and so on.'
   'Did you hear what I said?'
   'What about?'
   'Oh. Nothing. Nothing much, really. Sorry.'
   Ysabell sighed and stood up.
   'I expect you'll be wanting to get off,' she said. 'I'm glad we got this marriage business sorted out. It was quite nice talking to you.'
   'We could have a sort of hate-hate relationship,' said Mort.
   'I don't normally get to talk with the people father works with.' She appeared to be unable to draw herself away, as though she was waiting for Mort to say something else.
   'Well, you wouldn't,' was all he could think of.
   'I expect you've got to go off to work now.'
   'More or less.' Mort hesitated, aware that in some indefinable way the conversation had drifted out of the shallows and was now floating over some deep bits he didn't quite understand.
   There was a noise like—
   It made Mort recall the old yard at home, with a pang of homesickness. During the harsh Ramtop winters the family kept hardy mountaintharga beasts in the yard, chucking in straw as necessary. After the spring thaw the yard was several feet deep and had quite a solid crust on it. You could walk across it if you were careful. If you weren't, and sank knee deep in the concentrated gyppo, then the sound your boot made as it came out, green and steaming, was as much the sound of the turning year as birdsong and beebuzz.
   It was that noise. Mort instinctively examined his shoes.
   Ysabell was crying, not in little ladylike sobs, but in great yawning gulps, like bubbles from an underwater volcano, fighting one another to be the first to the surface. They were sobs escaping under pressure, matured in humdrum misery.
   Mort said, 'Er?'
   Her body was shaking like a waterbed in an earthquake zone. She fumbled urgently in her sleeves for the handkerchief, but it was no more use in the circumstances than a paper hat in a thunderstorm. She tried to say something, which became a stream of consonants punctuated by sobs.
   Mort said, 'Um?'
   'I said, how old do you think I am?'
   'Fifteen?' he hazarded.
   'I'm sixteen,' she wailed. 'And do you know how long I've been sixteenfor?'
   'I'm sorry, I don't under—'
   'No, you wouldn't. No one would.' She blew her nose again, and despite her shaking hands nevertheless carefully tucked the rather damp hanky back up her sleeve.
   'You're allowed out,' she said. 'You haven't been here long enough to notice. Time stands still here, haven't you noticed? Oh,something passes, but it's not real time. He can't create real time.'
   'Oh.'
   When she spoke again it was in the thin, careful and above allbrave voice of someone who has pulled themselves together despite overwhelming odds but might let go again at any moment.
   'I've been sixteen for thirty-five years.'
   'Oh?'
   'It was bad enough the first year.'
   Mort looked back at his last few weeks, and nodded in sympathy.
   'Is that why you've been reading all those books?' he said.
   Ysabell looked down, and twiddled a sandalled toe in the gravel in an embarrassed fashion.
   'They're very romantic,' she said. 'There's some really lovely stories. There was this girl who drank poison when her young man had died, and there was one who jumped off a cliff because her father insisted she should marry this old man, and another one drowned herself rather than submit to—'
   Mort listened in astonishment. To judge by Ysabell's careful choice of reading matter, it was a matter of note for any Disc female to survive adolescence long enough to wear out a pair of stockings.
   '— and then she thought he was dead, and she killed herself and then he woke up and so he did kill himself, and then there was this girl —'
   Common sense suggested that at least a few women reached their third decade without killing themselves for love, but common sense didn't seem to get even a walk-on part in these dramas.[5] Mort was already aware that love made you feel hot and cold and cruel and weak, but he hadn't realized that it could make you stupid.
   '– swam the river every night, but one night there was this storm, and when he didn't arrive she —'
   Mort felt instinctively that some young couples met, say, at a village dance, and hit it off, and went out together for a year or two, had a few rows, made up, got married and didn't kill themselves at all.
   He became aware that the litany of star-crossed love had wound down.
   'Oh,' he said, weakly. 'Doesn't anyone just, you know, just get along any more?'
   To love is to suffer,' said Ysabell. 'There's got to be lots of dark passion.'
   'Has there?'
   'Absolutely. And anguish.'
   Ysabell appeared to recall something.
   'Did you say something about something flapping around loose?' she said, in the tight voice of someone pulling themselves together.
   Mort considered. 'No,' he said.
   'I'm afraid I wasn't paying much attention.'
   'It doesn't matter at all.'
   They strolled back to the house in silence.
   When Mort went back to the study he found that Death had gone, leaving four hourglasses on the desk. The big leather book was lying on a lectern, securely locked shut.
   There was a note tucked under the glasses.
   Mort had imagined that Death's handwriting would either be gothic or else tombstone angular, but Death had in fact studied a classic work on graphology before selecting a style and had adopted a hand that indicated a balanced, well-adjusted personality.
   It said:
   Gone fyshing. Theyre ys ane execution in Pseudopoiis, a naturral in Krull, a faytal fall in the Carrick Mtns, ane ague in Ell-Kinte. Thee rest of thee day's your own.

   Mort thought that history was thrashing around like a steel hawser with the tension off, twanging backwards and forwards across reality in great destructive sweeps.
   History isn't like that. History unravels gently, like an old sweater. It has been patched and darned many times, reknitted to suit different people, shoved in a box under the sink of censorship to be cut up for the dusters of propaganda, yet it always– eventually – manages to spring back into its old familiar shape. History has a habit of changing the people who think they are changingit. History always has a few tricks up its frayed sleeve. It's been around a long time.
   This is what was happening:
   The misplaced stroke of Mort's scythe had cut history into two separate realities. In the city of Sto Lat Princess Keli still ruled, with a certain amount of difficulty and with the full time aid of the Royal Recognizer, who was put on the court payroll and charged with the duty of remembering that she existed. In the lands outside, though– beyond the plain, in the Ramtops, around the Circle Sea and all the way to the Rim – the traditional reality still held sway and she was quite definitely dead, the duke was king and the world was proceeding sedately according to plan, whatever that was.
   The point is that both realities were true.
   The sort of historical event horizon was currently about twenty miles away from the city, and wasn't yet very noticeable. That's because the , call it the difference in historical pressures– wasn't yet very great. But it was growing. Out in the damp cabbage fields there was a shimmer in the air and a faint sizzle, like frying grasshoppers.
   People don't alter history any more than birds alter the sky, they just make brief patterns in it. Inch by inch, implacable as a glacier and far colder, the real reality was grinding back towards Sto Lat.

   Mort was the first person to notice.
   It had been a long afternoon. The mountaineer had held on to his icy handhold until the last moment and the executee had called Mort a lackey of the monarchist state. Only the old lady of 103, who had gone to her reward surrounded by her sorrowing relatives, had smiled at him and said he was looking a little pale.
   The Disc sun was close to the horizon by the time Binky cantered wearily through the skies over Sto Lat, and Mort looked down and saw the borderland of reality. It curved away below him, a crescent of faint silver mist. He didn't know what it was, but he had a nasty foreboding that it had something to do with him.
   He reined in the horse and allowed him to trot gently towards the ground, touching down a few yards behind the wall of iridescent air. It was moving at something less than walking pace, hissing gently as it drifted ghost-like across the stark damp cabbage fields and frozen drainage ditches.
   It was a cold night, the type of night when frost and fog fight for domination and every sound is muffled. Binky's breath made fountains of cloud in the still air. He whinnied gently, almost apologetically, and pawed at the ground.
   Mort slid out of the saddle and crept up to the interface. It crackled softly. Weird shapes coruscated across it, flowing and shifting and disappearing.
   After some searching he found a stick and poked it cautiously into the wall. It made strange ripples that wobbled slowly out of sight.
   Mort looked up as a shape drifted overhead. It was a black owl, patrollng the ditches for anything small and squeaky.
   It hit the wall with a splash of sparkling mist, leaving an owl-shaped ripple that grew and spread until it joined the boiling kaleidoscope.
   Then it vanished. Mort could see through the transparent interface, and certainly no owl reappeared on the other side. Just as he was puzzling over this there was another soundless splash a few feet away and the bird burst into view again, totally unconcerned, and skimmed away across the fields.
   Mort pulled himself together, and stepped through the barrier which was no barrier at all. It tingled.
   A moment later Binky burst through after him, eyes rolling in desperation and tendrils of interface catching on his hooves. He reared up, shaking his mane like a dog to remove clinging fibres of mist, and looked at Mort beseechingly.
   Mort caught his bridle, patted him on the nose, and fumbled in his pocket for a rather grubby sugar lump. He was aware that he was in the presence of something important, but he wasn't yet quite sure what it was.
   Therewas a road running between an avenue of damp and gloomy willow trees. Mort remounted and steered Binky across the field into the dripping darkness under the branches.
   In the distance he could see the lights of Sto Helit, which really wasn't much more than a small town, and a faint glow on the edge of sight must be Sto Lat. He looked at it longingly.
   The barrier worried him. He could see it creeping across the field behind the trees.
   Mort was on the point of urging Binky back into the air when he saw the light immediately ahead of him, warm and beckoning. It was spilling from the windows of a large building set back from the road. It was probably a cheerful sort of light in any case, but in these surroundings and compared with Mort's mood it was positively ecstatic.
   As he rode nearer he saw shadows moving against it, and made out a few snatches of song. It was an inn, and inside there were people having a good time, or what passed for a good time if you were a peasant who spent most of your time closely concerned with cabbages. Compared to brassicas, practically anything is fun.
   There were human beings in there, doing uncomplicated human things like getting drunk and forgetting the words of songs.
   Mort had never really felt homesick, possibly because his mind had been too occupied with other things. But he felt it now for the first time– a sort of longing, not for a place, but for a state of mind, for being just an ordinary human being with straightforward things to worry about, like money and sickness and other people. . . .
   'I shall have a drink,' he thought, 'and perhaps I shall feel better.'
   There was an open-fronted stable at one side of the main building, and he led Binky into the warm, horse-smelling darkness that already accommodated three other horses. As Mort unfastened the nosebag he wondered if Death's horse felt the same way about other horses which had rather less supernatural lifestyles. He certainly looked impressive compared to the others, which regarded him watchfully. Binky was a real horse– the blisters of the shovel handle on Mort's hands were a testimony to that – and compared to the others he looked more real than ever. More solid. More horsey. Slightly larger than life.
   In fact, Mort was on the verge of making an important deduction, and it is unfortunate that he was distracted, as he walked across the yard to the inn's low door, by the sight of the inn sign. Its artist hadn't been particularly gifted, but there was no mistaking the line of Keli's jaw or her mass of fiery hair in the portrait of The Quene's Hed.
   He sighed, and pushed open the door.
   As one man, the assembled company stopped talking and stared at him with the honest rural stare that suggests that for two pins they'll hit you around the head with a shovel and bury your body under a compost heap at full moon.
   It might be worth taking another look at Mort, because he's changed a lot in the last few chapters. For example, while he still has plenty of knees and elbows about his person, they seem to have migrated to their normal places and he no longer moves as though his joints were loosely fastened together with elastic bands. He used to look as if he knew nothing at all; now he looks as though he knows too much. Something about his eyes suggests that he has seen things that ordinary people never see, or at least never see more than once.
   Something about all the rest of him suggests to the watchers that causing an inconvenience for this boy might just be as wise as kicking a wasp nest. In short, Mort no longer looks like something the cat brought in and then brought up.
   The landlord relaxed his grip on the stout blackthorn peacemaker he kept under the bar and composed his features into something resembling a cheerful welcoming grin, although not very much.
   'Evening, your lordship,' he said. 'What's your pleasure this cold and frosty night?'
   'What?' said Mort, blinking in the light.
   'What he means is, what d'you want to drink?' said a small ferret-faced man sitting by the fire, who was giving Mort the kind of look a butcher gives a field full of lambs.
   'Um. I don't know,' said Mort. 'Do you sell star drip?'
   'Never heard of it, lordship.'
   Mort looked around at the faces watching him, illuminated by the firelight. They were the sort of people generally called the salt of the earth. In other words, they were hard, square and bad for your health, but Mort was too preoccupied to notice.
   'What do people like to drink here, then?'
   The landlord looked sideways at his customers, a clever trick given that they were directly in front of him.
   'Why, lordship, we drink scumble, for preference.'
   'Scumble?' said Mort, failing to notice the muffled sniggers.
   'Aye, lordship. Made from apples. Well, mainly apples.'
   This seemed healthy enough to Mort. 'Oh, right,' he said. 'A pint of scumble, then.' He reached into his pocket and withdrew the bag of gold that Death had given him. It was still quite full. In the sudden hush of the inn the faint clink of the coins sounded like the legendary Brass Gongs of Leshp, which can be heard far out to sea on stormy nights as the currents stir them in their drowned towers three hundred fathoms below.
   'And please serve these gentlemen with whatever they want,' he added.
   He was so overwhelmed by the chorus of thanks that he didn't take much notice of the fact that his new friends were served their drink in tiny, thimble-sized glasses, while his alone turned up in a large wooden mug.
   A lot of stories are told about scumble, and how it is made out on the damp marshes according to ancient recipes handed down rather unsteadily from father to son. It's not true about the rats, or the snake heads, or the lead shot. The one about the dead sheep is a complete fabrication. We can lay to rest all the variations of the one about the trouser button. But the one about not letting it come into contact with metal is absolutely true, because when the landlord flagrantly shortchanged Mort and plonked the small heap of copper in a puddle of the stuff it immediately began to froth.
   Mort sniffed his drink, and then took a sip. It tasted something like apples, something like autumn mornings, and quite a lot like the bottom of a logpile. Not wishing to appear disrespectful, however, he took a swig.
   The crowd watched him, counting under its breath.
   Mort felt something was being demanded of him.
   'Nice,' he said, 'very refreshing.' He took another sip. 'Bit of an acquired taste,' he added, 'but well worth the effort, I'm sure.'
   There were one or two mutters of discontent from the back of the crowd.
   'He's been watering the scumble, that's what 'tis.'
   'Nay, thou knowst what happens if you lets a drop of water touch scumble.'
   The landlord tried to ignore this. 'You like it?' he said to Mort, in pretty much the same tone of voice people used when they said to St George, 'You killed awhat?'
   'It's quite tangy,' said Mort. 'And sort of nutty.'
   'Excuse me,' said the landlord, and gently took the mug out of Mort's hand. He sniffed at it, then wiped his eyes.
   'Uuunnyag,' he said. 'It's the right stuff all right.'
   He looked at the boy with something verging on admiration. It wasn't that he'd drunk a third of a pint of scumble in itself, it was that he was still vertical and apparently alive. He handed the pot back again: it was as if Mort was being given a trophy after some incredible contest. When the boy took another mouthful several of the watchers winced. The landlord wondered what Mort's teeth were made of, and decided it must be the same stuff as his stomach.
   'You're not a wizard by any chance?' he enquired, just in case.
   'Sorry, no. Should I be?'
   Didn't think so, thought the landlord, he doesn't walk like a wizard and anyway he isn't smoking anything. He looked at the scumble pot again.
   There was something wrong about this. There was something wrong about the boy. He didn't look right. He looked—
   — more solid than he should do.
   That was ridiculous, of course. The bar was solid, the floor was solid, the customers were as solid as you could wish for. Yet Mort, standing there looking rather embarrassed and casually sipping a liquid you could clean spoons with, seemed to emit a particularly potent sort of solidness, an extra dimension of realness. His hair was more hairy, his clothes more clothy, his boots the epitome of bootness. It made your head ache just to look at him.
   However, Mort then demonstrated that he was human after all. The mug dropped from his stricken fingers and clattered on the flagstones, where the dregs of scumble started to eat its way through them. He pointed at the far wall, his mouth opening and shutting wordlessly.
   The regulars turned back to their conversations and games of shovel-up, reassured that things were as they should be; Mort was acting perfectly normally now. The landlord, relieved that the brew had been vindicated, reached across the bar top and patted him companionably on the shoulder.
   'It's all right,' he said. 'It often takes people like this, you'll just have a headache for a few weeks, don't worry about it, a drop of scumble'll see you all right again.'
   It is a fact that the best remedy for a scumble hangover is a hair of the dog, although it should more accurately be called a tooth of the shark or possibly a tread of the bulldozer.
   But Mort merely went on pointing and said, in a trembling voice, 'Can't you see it? It's coming through the wall! It's coming right through the wall!'
   'A lot of things come through the wall after your first drink of scumble. Green hairy things, usually.'
   'It's the mist! Can't you hear it sizzling?'
   'A sizzling mist, is it?' The landlord looked at the wall, which was quite empty and unmysterious except for a few cobwebs. The urgency in Mort's voice unsettled him. He would have preferred the normal scaly monsters. A man knew where he stood with them.
   'It's coming right across the room! Can't you feel it?'
   The customers looked at one another. Mort was making them uneasy. One or two of them admitted later that they did feel something, rather like an icy tingle, but it could have been indigestion.
   Mort backed away, and then gripped the bar. He shivered for a moment.
   'Look,' said the landlord, 'a joke's a joke, but—'
   'You had a green shirt on before!'
   The landlord looked down. There was an edge of terror in his voice.
   'Before what?' he quavered. To his astonishment, and before his hand could complete its surreptitious journey towards the blackthorn stick, Mort lunged across the bar and grabbed him by the apron.
   'You've got a green shirt, haven't you?' he said. 'I saw it, it had little yellow buttons!'
   'Well, yes. I've got two shirts.' The landlord tried to draw himself up a little. 'I'm a man of means,' he added. 'I just didn't wear it today.' He didn't want to know how Mort knew about the buttons.
   Mort let him go and spun round.
   'They're all sitting in different places! Where's the man who was sitting by the fire? It's all changed!'
   He ran out through the door and there was a muffled cry from outside. He dashed back, wild-eyed, and confronted the horrified crowd.
   'Who changed the sign? Someone changed the sign!'
   The landlord nervously ran his tongue across his lips.
   'After the old king died, you mean?' he said.
   Mort's look chilled him, the boy's eyes were two black pools of terror.
   'It's the name I mean!'
   'We've– it's always been the same name,' said the man, looking desperately at his customers for support. 'Isn't that so, lads? The Duke's Head.'
   There was a murmured chorus of agreement.
   Mort stared at everyone, visibly shaking. Then he turned and ran outside again.
   The listeners heard hoof beats in the yard, which grew fainter and then disappeared entirely, just as though a horse had left the face of the earth.
   There was no sound inside the inn. Men tried to avoid one another's gaze. No one wanted to be the first to admit to seeing what he thought he had just seen.
   So it was left to the landlord to walk unsteadily across the room and reach out and run his fingers across the familiar, reassuring wooden surface of the door. It was solid, unbroken, everything a door should be.
   Everyone had seen Mort run through it three times. He just hadn't opened it.

   Binky fought for height, rising nearly vertically with his hooves thrashing the air and his breath curling away behind him like a vapour trail. Mort hung on with knees and hands and mostly with willpower, his face buried in the horse's mane. He didn't look down until the air around him was freezing and thin as workhouse gravy.
   Overhead the Hub Lights flickered silently across the winter sky. Below—
   — an upturned saucer, miles across, silvery in the starlight. He could see lights through it. Clouds were drifting through it.
   No. He watched carefully. Clouds were certainly drifting into it, and there were cloudsin it, but the clouds inside were wispier and moving in a slightly different direction and, in fact, didn't seem to have much to do with the clouds outside. There was something else . . . oh yes, the Hub Lights. They gave the night outside the ghostly hemisphere a faint green tint, but there was no sign of it under the dome.
   It was like looking into a piece of another world, almost identical, that had been grafted on to the Disc. The weather was slightly different in there, and the Lights weren't on display tonight.
   And the Disc was resenting it, and surrounding it, and pushing it back into non-existence. Mort couldn't see it growing smaller from up here, but in his mind's ear he could hear the locust sizzle of the thing as it ground across the land, changing things back to where they should be. Reality was healing itself.
   Mort knew, without even having to think about it, who was at the centre of the dome. It was obvious even from here that it was centred firmly on Sto Lat.
   He tried not to think what would happen when the dome had shrunk to the size of the room, and then the size of a person, and then the size of an egg. He failed.
   Logic would have told Mort that here was his salvation. In a day or two the problem would solve itself; the books in the library would be right again; the world would have sprung back into shape like an elastic bandage. Logic would have told him that interfering with the process a second time around would only make things worse. Logic would have said all that, if only Logic hadn't taken the night off too.

   Light travels quite slowly on the Disc, due to the braking effect of the huge magical field, and currently that part of the Rim carrying the island of Krull was directly under the little sun's orbit and it was, therefore, still early evening. It was also quite warm, since the Rim picks up more heat and enjoys a gentle maritime climate.
   In fact Krull, with a large part of what for want of a better word must be called its coastline sticking out over the Edge, was a fortunate island. The only native Krullians who did not appreciate this were those who didn't look where they were going or who walked in their sleep and, because of natural selection, there weren't very many of them any more. All societies have their share of dropouts, but on Krull they never had a chance to drop back in again.
   Terpsic Mims was not a dropout. He was an angler. There is a difference; angling is more expensive. But Terpsic was happy. He was watching a feather on a cork bob gently on the gentle, reed-lined waters of the Hakrull river and his mind was very nearly a blank. The only thing that could have disturbed his mood was actually catching a fish, because catching fish was the one thing about angling that he really dreaded. They were cold and slimy and panicky and got on his nerves, and Terpsic's nerves weren't very good.
   So long as he caught nothing Terpsic Mims was one of the Disc's happiest anglers, because the Hakrull river was five miles from his home and therefore five miles from Mrs Gwladys Mims, with whom he had enjoyed six happy months of married life. That had been some twenty years previously.
   Terpsic did not pay undue heed when another angler took up station further along the bank. Of course, some fishermen might have objected to this breach of etiquette, but in Terpsic's book anything that reduced his chance of actually catching any of the damned things was all right by him. Out of the corner of his eye he noted that the newcomer was fly-fishing, an interesting pastime which Terpsic had rejected because one spent altogether far too much time at home making the equipment.
   He had never seen fly-fishing like this before. There were wet flies, and there were dry flies, but this fly augured into the water with a saw-toothed whine and dragged the fish out backwards.
   Terpsic watched in horrified fascination as the indistinct figure behind the willow trees cast and cast again. The water boiled as the river's entire piscine population fought to get out of the way of the buzzing terror and, unfortunately, a large and maddened pike took Terpsic's hook out of sheer confusion.
   One moment he was standing on the bank, and the next he was in a green, clanging gloom, bubbling his breath away and watching his life flash before his eyes and, even in the moment of drowning, dreading the thought of watching the bit between the day of his wedding and the present. It occurred to him that Gwladys would soon be a widow, which cheered him up a little bit. In fact Terpsic had always tried to look on the bright side, and it struck him, as he sank gratefully into the silt, that from this point on his whole life could only improve. . . .
   And a hand grabbed his hair and dragged him to the surface, which was suddenly full of pain. Ghastly blue and black blotches swam in front of his eyes. His lungs were on fire. His throat was a pipe of agony.
   Hands– cold hands, freezing hands, hands that felt like a glove full of dice – towed him through the water and threw him down on to the bank where, after some game attempts to get on with drowning, he was eventually bullied back into what passed for his life.
   Terpsic didn't often get angry, because Gwladys didn't hold with it. But he felt cheated. He'd been born without being consulted, he'd been married because Gwladys and her father had seen to it, and the only major human achievement that was uniquely his had been rudely snatched away from him. A few seconds ago it had all been so simple. Now it was all complicated again.
   Not that he wanted to die, of course. The gods were very firm on the subject of suicide. He just hadn't wanted to be rescued.
   Through red eyes in a mask of slime and duckweed he peered at the blurred form above him, and shouted, 'Why did you have to save me?'
   The answer worried him. He thought about it as he squelched all the way home. It sat at the back of his mind while Gwladys complained about the state of his clothes. It squirrelled around in his head as he sat and sneezed guiltily by the fire, because being ill was another thing Gwladys didn't hold with. As he lay shivering in bed it settled in his dreams like an iceberg. In the midst of his fever he muttered, 'What did he mean, "FOR LATER"?'

   Torches flared in the city of Sto Lat. Whole squads of men were charged with the task of constantly renewing them. The streets glowed. The sizzling flames pushed back shadows that had been blamelessly minding their own business every night for centuries. They illuminated ancient corners where the eyes of bewildered rats glittered in the depths of their holes. They forced burglars to stay indoors. They glowed on the night mists, forming a nimbus of yellow light that blotted out the cold high flames streaming from the Hub. But mainly they shone on the face of Princess Keli.
   It was everywhere. It plastered every flat surface. Binky cantered along the glowing streets between Princess Keli on doors, walls and gable ends. Mort gaped at posters of his beloved on every surface where workmen had been able to make paste stick.
   Even stranger, no one seemed to be paying them much attention. While Sto Lat's night life was not as colourful and full of incident as that of Ankh-Morpork, in the same way that a wastepaper basket cannot compete with a municipal tip, the streets were nevertheless a-bustle with people and shrill with the cries of hucksters, gamblers, sellers of sweetmeats, pea-and-thimble men, ladies of assignation, pickpockets and the occasional honest trader who had wandered in by mistake and couldn't now raise enough money to leave. As Mort rode through them snatches of conversation in half-a-dozen languages floated into his ears; with numb acceptance he realized he could understand every one of them.
   He eventually dismounted and led the horse along Wall Street, searching in vain for Cutwell's house. He found it only because a lump on the nearest poster was making muffled swearing noises.
   He reached out gingerly and pulled aside a strip of paper.
   'Thanks very much,' said the gargoyle doorknocker. 'You wouldn't credit it, would you? One minute life as normal, nexft minute a mouthful of glue.'
   'Where's Cutwell?'
   'He's gone off to the palace.' The knocker leered at him and winked a cast-iron eye. 'Some men came and took all his fstuff away. Then some ovver men started pasting pictures of his girlfriend all over the place. Barftuds,' it added.
   Mort coloured.
   'His girlfriend?'
   The doorknocker, being of the demonic persuasion, sniggered at his tone. It sounded like fingernails being dragged over a file.
   'Yeff,' it said. They feemed in a bit of a hurry, if you ask me.'
   Mort was already up on Binky's back.
   'I fay!' shouted the knocker at his retreating back. 'I fay! Could you unftick me, boy?'
   Mort tugged on Binky's reins so hard that the horse reared and danced crazily backwards across the cobbles, then reached out and grabbed the ring of the knocker. The gargoyle looked up into his face and suddenly felt like a very frightened doorknocker indeed. Mort's eyes glowed like crucibles, his expression was a furnace, his voice held enough heat to melt iron. It didn't know what he could do, but felt that it would prefer not to find out.
   'What did you call me?' Mort hissed.
   The doorknocker thought quickly. 'Fir?' it said.
   'What did you ask me to do?'
   'Unftick me?'
   'I don't intend to.'
   'Fine,' said the doorknocker, 'fine. That's okay by me. I'll just ftick around, then.'
   It watched Mort canter off along the street and shuddered with relief, knocking itself gently in its nervousness.
   'A naaaarrow sqeeeak,' said one of the hinges.
   'Fut up!'

   Mort passed night watchmen, whose job now appeared to consist of ringing bells and shouting the name of the Princess, but a little uncertainly, as if they had difficulty remembering it. He ignored them, because he was listening to voices inside his head which went:
   She's only met you once, you fool. Why should she bother about you?
   Yes, but I did save her life.
   That means it belongs to her. Not to you. Besides, he's a wizard.
   So what? Wizards aren't supposed to– to go out with girls, they're celebrate. . . .
   Celebrate?
   They're not supposed to, you know. . . .
   What, never any you know at all? said the internal voice, and it sounded as if it was grinning.
   It's supposed to be bad for the magic, thought Mort bitterly.
   Funny place to keep magic.
   Mort was shocked. Who are you? he demanded.
   I'm you, Mort. Your inner self.
   Well, I wish I'd get out of my head, it's quite crowded enough with me in here.
   Fair enough, said the voice, I was only trying to help. But remember, if you ever need you, you're always around.
   The voice faded away.
   Well, thought Mort bitterly, that must have been me. I'm the only one that calls me Mort.
   The shock of the realization quite obscured the fact that, while Mort had been locked into the monologue, he had ridden right through the gates of the palace. Of course, people rode through the gates of the palace every day, but most of them needed the things to be opened first.
   The guards on the other side were rigid with fear, because they thought they had seen a ghost. They would have been far more frightened if they had known that a ghost was almost exactly what they hadn't seen.
   The guard outside the doors of the great hall had seen it happen too, but he had time to gather his wits, or such that remained, and raise his spear as Binky trotted across the courtyard.
   'Halt,' he croaked. 'Halt. What goes where?'
   Mort saw him for the first time.
   'What?' he said, still lost in thought.
   The guard ran his tongue over his dry lips, and backed away. Mort slid off Binky's back and walked forward.
   'I meant, what goes there?' the guard tried again, with a mixture of doggedness and suicidal stupidity that marked him for early promotion.
   Mort caught the spear gently and lifted it out of the way of the door. As he did so the torchlight illuminated his face.
   'Mort,' he said softly.
   It should have been enough for any normal soldier, but this guard was officer material.
   'I mean, friend or foe?' he stuttered, trying to avoid Mort's gaze.
   'Which would you prefer?' he grinned. It wasn't quite the grin of his master, but it was a pretty effective grin and didn't have a trace of humour in it.
   The guard sagged with relief, and stood aside.
   'Pass, friend,' he said.
   Mort strode across the hall towards the staircase that led to the royal apartments. The hall had changed a lot since he last saw it. Portraits of Keli were everywhere; they'd even replaced the ancient and crumbling battle banners in the shadowy heights of the roof. Anyone walking through the palace would have found it impossible to go more than a few steps without seeing a portrait. Part of Mort's mind wondered why, just as another part worried about the flickering dome that was steadily closing on the city, but most of his mind was a hot and steamy glow of rage and bewilderment and jealousy. Ysabell had been right, he thought, this must be love.
   'The walk-through-walls boy!'
   He jerked his head up. Cutwell was standing at the top of the stairs.
   The wizard had changed a lot too, Mort thought bitterly. Perhaps not that much, though. Although he was wearing a black and white robe embroidered with sequins, although his pointy hat was a yard high and decorated with more mystic symbols than a dental chart, and although his red velvet shoes had silver buckles and toes that curled like snails, there were still a few stains on his collar and he appeared to be chewing.
   He watched Mort climb the stairs towards him.
   'Are you angry about something?' he said. 'I started work, but I got rather tied up with other things. Very difficult, walking through– why are you looking at me like that?'
   'What are you doing here?'
   'I might ask you the same question. Would you like a strawberry?'
   Mort glanced at the small wooden punnet in the wizard's hands.
   'In mid-winter?'
   'Actually, they're sprouts with a dash of enchantment.'
   They taste like strawberries?'
   Cutwell sighed. 'No, like sprouts. The spell isn't totally efficient. I thought they might cheer the princess up, but she threw them at me. Shame to waste them. Be my guest.'
   Mort gaped at him.
   'She threw them at you?'
   'Very accurately, I'm afraid. Very strong-minded young lady.'
   Hi, said a voice in the back of Mort's mind, it's you again, pointing out to yourself that the chances of the princess even contemplating you know with this fellow are on the far side of remote.
   Go away, thought Mort. His subconscious was worrying him. It appeared to have a direct line to parts of his body that he wanted to ignore at the moment.
   'Whyare you here?' he said aloud. 'Is it something to do with all these pictures?'
   'Good idea, wasn't it?' beamed Cutwell. 'I'm rather proud of it myself.'
   'Excuse me,' said Mort weakly. 'I've had a busy day. I think I'd like to sit down somewhere.'
   'There's the Throne Room,' said Cutwell. 'There's no one in there at this time of night. Everyone's asleep.'
   Mort nodded, and then looked suspiciously at the young wizard.
   'What are you doing up, then?' he said.
   'Um,' said Cutwell, 'um, I just thought I'd see if there was anything in the pantry.'
   He shrugged.[6]
   Now is the time to report that Cutwell too notices that Mort, even a Mort weary with riding and lack of sleep, is somehow glowing from within and in some strange way unconnected with size is nevertheless larger than life. The difference is that Cutwell is, by training, a better guesser than other people and knows that in occult matters the obvious answer is usually the wrong one.
   Mort can move absentmindedly through walls and drink neat widowmaker soberly not because he is turning into a ghost, but because he is becoming dangerously real.
   In fact, as the boy stumbles while they walk along the silent corridors and steps through a marble pillar without noticing, it's obvious that the world is becoming a pretty insubstantial place from his point of view.
   'You just walked through a marble pillar,' observed Cutwell. 'How did you do it?'
   'Did I?' Mort looked around. The pillar looked sound enough. He poked an arm towards it, and slightly bruised his elbow.
   'I could have sworn you did,' said Cutwell. 'Wizards notice these things, you know.' He reached into the pocket of his robe.
   'Then have you noticed the mist dome around the country?' said Mort.
   Cutwell squeaked. The jar in his hand dropped and smashed on the tiles; there was the smell of slightly rancid salad dressing.
   'Already?'
   'I don't know about already,' said Mort, 'but there's this sort of crackling wall sliding over the land and no one else seems to worry about it and—'
   'How fast was it moving?'
   '— it changes things!'
   'You saw it? How far away is it? How fast is it moving?'
   'Of course I saw it. I rode through it twice. It was like—'
   'But you're not a wizard, so why—'
   'What are you doing here, anyway—'
   Cutwell took a deep breath. 'Everyone shut up!' he screamed.
   There was silence. Then the wizard grabbed Mort's arm. 'Come on,' he said, pulling him back along the corridor. 'I don't know who you are exactly and I hope I've got time to find out one day but something really horrible is going to happen soon and I think you're involved, somehow.'
   'Something horrible? When?'
   'That depends on how far away the interface is and how fast it's moving,' said Cutwell, dragging Mort down a side passage. When they were outside a small oak door he let go of his arm and fumbled in his pocket again, removing a small hard piece of cheese and an unpleasantly squashy tomato.
   'Hold these, will you? Thank you.' He delved again, produced a key and unlocked the door.
   'It's going to kill the princess, isn't it?' said Mort.
   'Yes,' said Cutwell, 'and then again, no.' He paused with his hand on the doorhandle. 'That was pretty perspicacious of you. How did you know?'
   'I—' Mort hesitated.
   'She told me a very strange story,' said Cutwell.
   'I expect she did,' said Mort. 'If it was unbelievable, it was true.'
   'You're him, are you? Death's assistant?'
   'Yes. Off duty at the moment, though.'
   'Pleased to hear it.'
   Cutwell shut the door behind them and fumbled for a candlestick. There was a pop, a flash of blue light and a whimper.
   'Sorry,' he said, sucking his fingers. 'Fire spell. Never really got the hang of it.'
   'You were expecting the dome thing, weren't you?' said Mort urgently. 'What will happen when it closes in?'
   The wizard sat down heavily on the remains of a bacon sandwich.
   'I'm not exactly sure,' he said. 'It'll be interesting to watch. But not from inside, I'm afraid. What Ithink will happen is that the last week will never have existed.'
   'She'll suddenly die?'
   'You don't quite understand. She will have been dead for a week. All this—' he waved his hands vaguely in the air – 'will not have happened. The assassin will have done his job. You will have done yours. History will have healed itself. Everything will be all right. From History's point of view, that is. There really isn't any other.'
   Mort stared out of the narrow window. He could see across the courtyard into the glowing streets outside, where a picture of the princess smiled at the sky.
   'Tell me about the pictures,' he said. That looks like some sort of wizard thing.'
   'I'm not sure if it's working. You see, people were beginning to get upset and they didn't know why, and that made it worse. Their minds were in one reality and their bodies were in another. Very unpleasant. They couldn't get used to the idea that she was still alive. I thought the pictures might be a good idea but, you know, people just don't see what their mind tells them isn't there.'
   'I could have told you that,' said Mort bitterly.
   'I had the town criers out during the daytime,' Cutwell continued. 'I thought that if people could come to believe in her, then this new reality could become the real one.'
   'Mmmph?' said Mort. He turned away from the window. 'What do you mean?'
   'Well, you see– I reckoned that if enough people believed in her, they could change reality. It works for gods. If people stop believing in a god, he dies. If a lot of them believe in him, he grows stronger.'
   'I didn't know that. I thought gods were just gods.'
   'They don't like it talked about,' said Cutwell, shuffling through the heap of books and parchments on his worktable.
   'Well, that might work for gods, because they're special,' said Mort. 'People are– more solid. It wouldn't work for people.'
   'That's not true. Let's suppose you went out of here and prowled around the palace. One of the guards would probably see you and he'd think you were a thief and he'd fire his crossbow. I mean, in his reality you'd be a thief. It wouldn't actually be true but you'd be just as dead as if it was. Belief is powerful stuff. I'm a wizard. We know about these things. Look here.'
   He pulled a book out of the debris in front of him and opened it at the piece of bacon he'd used as a bookmark. Mort looked over his shoulder, and frowned at the curly magical writing. It moved around on the page, twisting and writhing in an attempt not to be read by a non-wizard, and the general effect was unpleasant.
   'What's this?' he said.
   'It's the Book of the Magick of Alberto Malich the Mage,' said the wizard, 'a sort of book of magical theory. It's not a good idea to look too hard at the words, they resent it. Look, it says here—'
   His lips moved soundlessly. Little beads of sweat sprang up on his forehead and decided to get together and go down and see what his nose was doing. His eyes watered.
   Some people like to settle down with a good book. No one in possession of a complete set of marbles would like to settle down with a book of magic, because even the individual words have a private and vindictive life of their own and reading them, in short, is a kind of mental Indian wrestling. Many a young wizard has tried to read a grimoire that is too strong for him, and people who've heard the screams have found only his pointy shoes with the classic wisp of smoke coming out of them and a book which is, perhaps, just a little fatter. Things can happen to browsers in magical libraries that make having your face pulled off by tentacled monstrosities from the Dungeon Dimensions seem a mere light massage by comparison.
   Fortunately Cutwell had an expurgated edition, with some of the more distressing pages clamped shut (although on quiet nights he could hear the imprisoned words scritching irritably inside their prison, like a spider trapped in a matchbox; anyone who has ever sat next to someone wearing a Walkman will be able to imagine exactly what they sounded like).
   'This is the bit,' said Cutwell. 'It says here that even gods—'
   'I've seen him before!'
   'What?'
   Mort pointed a shaking finger at the book.
   'Him!'
   Cutwell gave him an odd look and examined the left-hand page. There was a picture of an elderly wizard holding a book and a candlestick in an attitude of near-terminal dignity.
   'That's not part of the magic,' he said testily, 'that's just the author.'
   'What does it say under the picture?'
   'Er, It says "Yff youe have enjoyed thiss Boke, youe maye be interestede yn othere Titles by—'
   'No, right under the picture is what I meant!'
   'That's easy. It's old Malich himself. Every wizard knows him. I mean, he founded the University.' Cutwell chuckled. There's a famous statue of him in the main hall, and during Rag Week once I climbed up it and put a—'
   Mort stared at the picture.
   'Tell me,' he said quietly, 'did the statue have a drip on the end of its nose?'
   'I shouldn't think so,' said Cutwell. 'It was marble. But I don't know what you're getting so worked up about. Lots of people know what he looked like. He's famous.'
   'He lived a long time ago, did he?'
   'Two thousand years, I think. Look, I don't know why—'
   'I bet he didn't die, though,' said Mort. 'I bet he just disappeared one day. Did he?'
   Cutwell was silent for a moment.
   'Funny you should say that,' he said slowly. There was a legend I heard. He got up to some weird things, they say. They say he blew himself into the Dungeon Dimensions while trying to perform the Rite of AshkEnte backwards. All they found was his hat. Tragic, really. The whole city in mourning for a day just for a hat. It wasn't even a particularly attractive hat; it had burn marks on it.'