'Alberto Malich,' said Mort, half to himself. 'Well. Fancy that.'
   He drummed his fingers on the table, although the sound was surprisingly muted.
   'Sorry,' said Cutwell. 'I can't get the hang of treacle sandwiches, either.'
   'I reckon the interface is moving at a slow walking pace,' said Mort, licking his fingers absent-mindedly. 'Can't you stop it by magic?'
   Cutwell shook his head. 'Not me. It'd squash me flat,' he said cheerfully.
   'What'll happen to you when it arrives, then?'
   'Oh, I'll go back to living in Wall Street. I mean, I never will have left. All this won't have happened. Pity, though. The cooking here is pretty good, and they do my laundry for free. How far away did you say it was, by the way?'
   'About twenty miles, I guess.'.
   Cutwell rolled his eyes heavenwards and moved his lips. Eventually he said: 'That means it'll arrive around midnight tomorrow, just in time for the coronation.'
   'Whose?'
   'Hers.'
   'But she's queen already, isn't she?'
   'In a way, but officially she's not queen until she's crowned.' Cutwell grinned, his face a pattern of shade in the candlelight, and added, 'If you want a way of thinking about it, then it's like the difference between stopping living and being dead.'
   Twenty minutes earlier Mort had been feeling tired enough to take root. Now he could feel a fizzing in his blood. It was the kind of late-night, frantic energy that you knew you would pay for around midday tomorrow, but for now he felt he had to have some action or else his muscles would snap out of sheer vitality.
   'I want to see her,' he said. 'If you can't do anything, there might be something I can do.'
   There's guards outside her room,' said Cutwell. 'I mention this merely as an observation. I don't imagine for one minute that they'll make the slightest difference.'

   It was midnight in Ankh-Morpork, but in the great twin city the only difference between night and day was, well, it was darker. The markets were thronged, the spectators were still thickly clustered around the whore pits, runners-up in the city's eternal and byzantine gang warfare drifted silently down through the chilly waters of the river with lead weights tied to their feet, dealers in various illegal and even illogical delights plied their sidelong trade, burglars burgled, knives flashed starlight in alleyways, astrologers started their day's work and in the Shades a nightwatch-man who had lost his way rang his bell and cried out: 'Twelve o'clock and all's arrrrrgghhhh, . . .'
   However, the Ankh-Morpork Chamber of Commerce would not be happy at the suggestion that the only real difference between their city and a swamp is the number of legs on the alligators, and indeed in the more select areas of Ankh, which tend to be in the hilly districts where there is a chance of a bit of wind, the nights are gentle and scented with habiscine and Cecillia blossoms.
   On this particular night they were scented with saltpetre, too, because it was the tenth anniversary of the accession of the Patrician[7] and he had invited a few friends round for a drink, five hundred of them in this case, and was letting off fireworks. Laughter and the occasional gurgle of passion filled the palace gardens, and the evening had just got to that interesting stage where everyone had drunk too much for their own good but not enough actually to fall over. It is the kind of state in which one does things that one will recall with crimson shame in later life, such as blowing through a paper squeaker and laughing so much that one is sick.
   In fact some two hundred of the Patrician's guests were now staggering and kicking their way through the Serpent Dance, a quaint Morporkian folkway which consisted of getting rather drunk, holding the waist of the person in front, and then wobbling and giggling uproariously in a long crocodile that wound through as many rooms as possible, preferably ones with breakables in, while kicking one leg vaguely in time with the beat, or at least in time with some other beat. This dance had gone on for half an hour and had wound through every room in the palace, picking up two trolls, the cook, the Patrician's head torturer, three waiters, a burglar who happened to be passing and a small pet swamp dragon.
   Somewhere around the middle of the dance was fat Lord Rodley of Quirm, heir to the fabulous Quirm estates, whose current preoccupation was with the thin fingers gripping his waist. Under its bath of alcohol his brain kept trying to attract his attention.
   'I say,' he called over his shoulder, as they oscillated for the tenth hilarious time through the enormous kitchen, 'not so tight, please.'
   I AM MOST TERRIBLY SORRY.
   'No offence, old chap. Do I know you?' said Lord Rodley, kicking vigorously on the back beat.
   I THINK IT UNLIKELY. TELL ME, PLEASE, WHAT IS THE MEANING OF THIS ACTIVITY?
   'What?' shouted Lord Rodley, above the sound of someone kicking in the door of a glass cabinet amid shrieks of merriment.
   WHAT IS THIS THING THAT WE DO? said the voice, with glacial patience.
   'Haven't you been to a party before? Mind the glass, by the way.'
   I AM AFRAID I DO NOT GET OUT AS MUCH AS I WOULD LIKE TO. PLEASE EXPLAIN THIS. DOES IT HAVE TO DO WITH SEX?
   'Not unless we pull up sharp, old boy, if you know what I mean?' said his lordship, and nudged his unseen fellow guest with his elbow.
   'Ouch,' he said. A crash up ahead marked the demise of the cold buffet.
   NO.
   'What?'
   I DO NOT KNOW WHAT YOU MEAN.
   'Mind the cream there, it's slippery– look, it's just a dance, all right? You do it for fun.'
   FUN.
   'That's right. Dada, dada, da– kick!' There was an audible pause.
   WHO IS THIS FUN?
   'No, fun isn't anybody, fun is what you have.'
   WE ARE HAVING FUN?
   'I thought I was,' said his lordship uncertainly. The voice by his ear was vaguely worrying him; it appeared to be arriving directly into his brain.
   WHAT IS THIS FUN?
   'This is!'
   TO KICK VIGOROUSLY IS FUN?
   'Well, part of the fun. Kick!'
   TO HEAR LOUD MUSIC IN HOT ROOMS IS FUN?
   'Possibly.'
   HOW IS THIS FUN MANIFEST?
   'Well, it– look, either you're having fun or you're not, you don't have to ask me, you just know, all right? How did you get in here, anyway?' he added. 'Are you a friend of the Patrician?'
   LET US SAY, HE PUTS BUSINESS MY WAY. I FELT I OUGHT TO LEARN SOMETHING OF HUMAN PLEASURES.
   'Sounds like you've got a long way to go.'
   I KNOW. PLEASE EXCUSE MY LAMENTABLE IGNORANCE. I WISH ONLY TO LEARN. ALL THESE PEOPLE, PLEASE– THEY ARE HAVING FUN?
   'Yes!'
   THEN THIS IS FUN.
   'I'm glad we've got that sorted out. Mind the chair,' snapped Lord Rodley, who was now feeling very unfunny and unpleasantly sober.
   A voice behind him said quietly: THIS IS FUN. TO DRINK EXCESSIVELY IS FUN. WE ARE HAVING FUN. HE IS HAVING FUN. THIS IS SOME FUN. WHAT FUN.
   Behind Death the Patrician's small pet swamp dragon held on grimly to the bony hips and thought: guards or no guards, next time we pass an open window I'm going to run like buggery.

   Keli sat bolt upright in bed.
   'Don't move another step,' she said. 'Guards!'
   'We couldn't stop him,' said the first guard, poking his head shame-facedly around the doorpost.
   'He just pushed in . . .' said the other guard, from the other side of the doorway.
   'And the wizard said it was all right, and we were told everyone must listen to him because…
   'All right, all right. People could get murdered around here,' said Keli testily, and put the crossbow back on the bedside table without, unfortunately, operating the safety catch.
   There was a click, the thwack of sinew against metal, a zip of air, and a groan. The groan came from Cutwell. Mort spun round to him.
   'Are you all right?' he said. 'Did it hit you?'
   'No,' said the wizard, weakly. 'No, it didn't. How do you feel?'
   'A bit tired. Why?'
   'Oh, nothing. Nothing. No draughts anywhere? No slight leaking feelings?'
   'No. Why?'
   'Oh, nothing, nothing.' Cutwell turned and looked closely at the wall behind Mort.
   'Aren't the dead allowed any peace?' said Keli bitterly. 'I thought one thing you could be sure of when you were dead was a good night's sleep.' She looked as though she had been crying. With an insight that surprised him, Mort realized that she knew this, and that it was making her even angrier than before.
   That's not really fair,' he said. 'I've come to help. Isn't that right, Cutwell?'
   'Hmm?' said Cutwell, who had found the crossbow bolt buried in the plaster and was looking at it with deep suspicion. 'Oh, yes. He has. It won't work, though. Excuse me, has anyone got any string?'
   'Help?' snapped Keli. 'Help? If it wasn't for you—'
   'You'd still be dead,' said Mort. She looked at him with her mouth open.
   'I wouldn't know about it, though,' she said. That's the worst part.'
   'I think you two had better go,' said Cutwell to the guards, who were trying to appear inconspicuous. 'But I'll have that spear, please. Thank you.'
   'Look,' said Mort, 'I've got a horse outside. You'd be amazed. I can take you anywhere. You don't have to wait around here.'
   'You don't know much about monarchy, do you,' said Keli.
   'Um. No?'
   ' She means better to be a dead queen in your own castle than a live commoner somewhere else,' said Cutwell, who had stuck the spear into the wall by the bolt and was trying to sight along it. 'Wouldn't work, anyway. The dome isn't centred on the palace, it's centred on her.'
   'Onwho?' said Keli. Her voice could have kept milk fresh for a month.
   'On her Highness,' said Cutwell automatically, squinting along the shaft.
   'Don't you forget it.'
   'I won't forget it, but that's not the point,' said he wizard. He pulled the bolt out of the plaster and tested the point with his finger.
   'But if you stay here you'll die!' said Mort.
   Then I shall have to show the Disc how a queen can die,' said Keli, looking as proud as was possible in a pink knitted bed jacket.
   Mort sat down on the end of the bed with his head in his hands.
   'Iknow how a queen can die,' he muttered. They die just like other people. And some of us would rather not see it happen.'
   'Excuse me, I just want to look at this crossbow,' said Cutwell conversationally, reaching across them. 'Don't mind me.'
   'I shall go proudly to meet my destiny,' said Keli, but there was the barest flicker of uncertainty in her voice.
   'No you won't. I mean, I know what I'm talking about. Take it from me. There's nothing proud about it. You just die.'
   'Yes, but it's how you do it. I shall die nobly, like Queen Ezeriel.'
   Mort's forehead wrinkled. History was a closed book to him.
   'Who's she?'
   'She lived in Klatch and she had a lot of lovers and she sat on a snake,' said Cutwell, who was winding up the crossbow.
   'She meant to! She was crossed in love!'
   'All I can remember was that she used to take baths in asses' milk. Funny thing, history,' said Cutwell reflectively. 'You become a queen, reign for thirty years, make laws, declare war on people and then the only thing you get remembered for is that you smelled like yoghurt and were bitten in the—'
   'She's a distant ancestor of mine,' snapped Keli. 'I won't listen to this sort of thing.'
   'Will you both be quiet and listen to me!' shouted Mort.
   Silence descended like a shroud.
   Then Cutwell sighted carefully and shot Mort in the back.

   The night shed its early casualties and journeyed onwards. Even the wildest parties had ended, their guests lurching home to their beds, or someone's bed at any rate. Shorn of these fellow travellers, mere daytime people who had strayed out of their temporal turf, the true survivors of the night got down to the serious commerce of the dark.
   This wasn't so very different from Ankh-Morpork's daytime business, except that the knives were more obvious and people didn't smile so much.
   The Shades were silent, save only for the whistled signals of thieves and the velvety hush of dozens of people going about their private business in careful silence.
   And, in Ham Alley, Cripple Wa's famous floating crap game was just getting under way. Several dozen cowled figures knelt or squatted around the little circle of packed earth where Wa's three eight-sided dice bounced and spun their misleading lesson in statistical probability.
   'Three!'
   'Tuphal's Eyes, by lo!'
   'He's got you there, Hummok! This guy knows how to roll his bones!'
   IT'S A KNACK.
   Hummok M'guk, a small flat-faced man from one of the Hublandish tribes whose skill at dice was famed wherever two men gathered together to fleece a third, picked up the dice and glared at them. He silently cursed Wa, whose own skill at switching dice was equally notorious among the cognoscenti but had, apparently, failed him, wished a painful and untimely death on the shadowy player seated opposite and hurled the dice into the mud.
   'Twenty-one the hard way!'
   Wa scooped up the dice and handed them to the stranger. As he turned to Hummok one eye flickered ever so slightly. Hummok was impressed– he'd barely noticed the blur in Wa's deceptively gnarled fingers, andhe'd been watching for it.
   It was disconcerting the way the things rattled in the stranger's hand and then flew out of it in a slow arc that ended with twenty-four little spots pointing at the stars.
   Some of the more streetwise in the crowd shuffled away from the stranger, because luck like that can be very unlucky in Cripple Wa's floating crap game.
   Wa's hand closed over the dice with a noise like the click of a trigger.
   'All the eights,' he breathed. 'Such luck is uncanny, mister.'
   The rest of the crowd evaporated like dew, leaving only those heavy-set, unsympathetic-looking men who, if Wa had ever paid tax, would have gone down on his return as Essential Plant and Business Equipment.
   'Maybe it's not luck,' he added. 'Maybe it's wizarding?'
   I MOST STRONGLY RESENT THAT.
   'We had a wizard once who tried to get rich,' said Wa. 'Can't seem to remember what happened to him. Boys?'
   'We give him a good talking-to—'
   '— and left him in Pork Passage —'
   '— and in Honey Lane —'
   '— and a couple other places I can't remember.'
   The stranger stood up. The boys closed in around him.
   THIS IS UNCALLED FOR. I SEEK ONLY TO LEARN. WHAT PLEASURE CAN HUMANS FIND IN A MERE REITERATION OF THE LAWS OF CHANCE?
   'Chance doesn't come into it. Let's have a look at him, boys.'
   The events that followed were recalled by no living soul except the one belonging to a feral cat, one of the city's thousands, that was crossing the alley en route to a tryst. It stopped and watched with interest.
   The boys froze in mid-stab. Painful purple light flickered around them. The stranger pushed his hood back and picked up the dice, and then pushed them into Wa's unresisting hand. The man was opening and shutting his mouth, his eyes unsuccessfully trying not to see what was in front of them. Grinning.
   THROW.
   Wa managed to look down at his hand.
   'What are the stakes?' he whispered.
   IF YOU WIN, YOU WILL REFRAIN FROM THESE RIDICULOUS ATTEMPTS TO SUGGEST THAT CHANCE GOVERNS THE AFFAIRS OF MEN.
   'Yes. Yes. And . . . if I lose?'
   YOU WILL WISH YOU HAD WON.
   Wa tried to swallow, but his throat had gone dry. 'I know I've had lots of people murdered—'
   TWENTY-THREE, TO BE PRECISE.
   'Is it too late to say I'm sorry?'
   SUCH THINGS DO NOT CONCERN ME. NOW THROW THE DICE.
   Wa shut his eyes and dropped the dice on to the ground, too nervous even to try the special flick-and-twist throw. He kept his eyes shut.
   ALL THE EIGHTS. THERE, THAT WASN'T TOO DIFFICULT, WAS IT?
   Wa fainted.
   Death shrugged, and walked away, pausing only to tickle the ears of an alley cat that happened to be passing. He hummed to himself. He didn't quite know what had come over him, but he was enjoying it.

   'You couldn't be sure it would work!'
   Cutwell spread his hands in a conciliatory gesture.
   'Well, no,' he conceded, 'but I thought, what have I got to lose?' He backed away.
   'What have you got to lose?' shouted Mort.
   He stamped forward and tugged the bolt out of one of the posts in the princess's bed.
   'You're not going to tell me this went through me?' he snapped.
   'I was particularly watching it,' said Cutwell.
   'I saw it too,' said Keli. 'It was horrible. It came right out of where your heart is.'
   'And I saw you walk through a stone pillar,' said Cutwell.
   'AndI saw you ride straight through a window.'
   'Yes, but thatwas on business,' declared Mort, waving his hands in the air. 'That wasn't everyday, that's different. And—'
   He paused. The way you're looking at me,' he said. They looked at me the same way in the inn this evening. What's wrong?'
   'It was the way you waved your arm straight through the bedpost,' said Keli faintly.
   Mort stared at his hand, and then rapped it on the wood.
   'See?' he said. 'Solid. Solid arm, solid wood.'
   'You said people looked at you in an inn?' said Cutwell. 'What did you do, then? Walk through the wall?'
   'No! I mean, no, I just drank this drink, I think it was called scrumble—'
   'Scumble?'
   'Yes. Tastes like rotten apples. You'd have thought it was some sort of poison the way they kept staring.'
   'How much did you drink, then?' said Cutwell.
   'A pint, perhaps, I wasn't really paying much attention—'
   'Did you know scumble is the strongest alcoholic drink between here and the Ramtops?' the wizard demanded.
   'No. No one said,' said Mort. 'What's it got to do with—'
   'No,' said Cutwell, slowly, 'you didn't know. Hmm. That's a clue, isn't it?'
   'Has it got anything to do with saving the princess?'
   'Probably not. I'd like to have a look at my books, though.'
   'In that case it's not important,' said Mort firmly.
   He turned to Keli, who was looking at him with the faint beginnings of admiration.
   'I think I can help,' he said. 'I think I can lay my hands on some powerful magic. Magic will hold back the dome, won't it, Cutwell?'
   'My magic won't. It'd have to be pretty strong stuff, and I'm not sure about it even then. Reality is tougher than—'
   'I shall go,' said Mort. 'Until tomorrow, farewell!'
   'It is tomorrow,' Keli pointed out.
   Mort deflated slightly.
   'All right, tonight then,' he said, slightly put out, and added, 'I will begone!'
   'Begone what?'
   'It's hero talk,' said Cutwell, kindly. 'He can't help it.' Mort scowled at him, smiled bravely at Keli and walked out of the room.
   'He might have opened the door,' said Keli, after he had gone.
   'I think he was a bit embarrassed,' said Cutwell. 'We all go through that stage.'
   'What, of walking through things?'
   'In a manner of speaking. Walking into them, anyway.'
   'I'm going to get some sleep,' Keli said. 'Even the dead need some rest. Cutwell, stop fiddling with that crossbow, please. I'm sure it's not wizardly to be alone in a lady's boudoir.'
   'Hmm? But I'm not alone, am I? You're here.'
   'That,' she said, 'is the point, isn't it?'
   'Oh. Yes. Sorry. Um. I'll see you in the morning, then.'
   'Goodnight, Cutwell. Shut the door behind you.'

   The sun crept over the horizon, decided to make a run for it, and began to rise.
   But it would be some time before its slow light rolled across the sleeping Disc, herding the night ahead of it, and nocturnal shadows still ruled the city.
   They clustered now around The Mended Drum in Filigree Street, foremost of the city's taverns. It was famed not for its beer, which looked like maiden's water and tasted like battery acid, but for its clientele. It was said that if you sat long enough in the Drum, then sooner or later every major hero on the Disc would steal your horse.
   The atmosphere inside was still loud with talk and heavy with smoke although the landlord was doing all those things landlords do when they think it's time to close, like turn some of the lights out, wind up the clock, put a cloth over the pumps and, just in case, check the whereabouts of their club with the nails hammered in it. Not that the customers were taking the slightest bit of notice, of course. To most of the Drum's clientele even the nailed club would have been considered a mere hint.
   However, they were sufficiently observant to be vaguely worried by the tall dark figure standing by the bar and drinking his way through its entire contents.
   Lonely, dedicated drinkers always generate a mental field which ensures complete privacy, but this particular one was radiating a kind of fatalistic gloom that was slowly emptying the bar.
   This didn't worry the barman, because the lonely figure was engaged in a very expensive experiment.
   Every drinking place throughout the multiverse has them– those shelves of weirdly-shaped, sticky bottles that not only contain exotically-named liquid, which is often blue or green, but also odds and ends that bottles of real drink would never stoop to contain, such as whole fruits, bits of twig and, in extreme cases, small drowned lizards. No-one knows why barmen stock so many, since they all taste like treacle dissolved in turpentine. It has been speculated that they dream of a day when someone will walk in off the street unbidden and ask for a glass of Peach Corniche with A Hint Of Mint and overnight the place will become somewhere To Be Seen At.
   The stranger was working his way along the row.
   WHAT IS THAT GREEN ONE?
   The landlord peered at the label.
   'It says it's Melon Brandy,' he said doubtfully. 'It says it's bottled by some monks to an ancient recipe, 'he added.
   I WILL TRY IT.
   The man looked sideways at the empty glasses on the counter, some of them still containing bits of fruit salad, cherries on a stick and small paper umbrellas.
   'Are you sure you haven't had enough?' he said. It worried him vaguely that he couldn't seem to make out the stranger's face.
   The glass, with its drink crystallising out on the sides, disappeared into the hood and came out again empty.
   NO. WHAT IS THE YELLOW ONE WITH THE WASPS IN IT?
   'Spring Cordial, it says. Yes?'
   YES. AND THEN THE BLUE ONE WITH THE GOLD FLECKS.
   'Er. Old Overcoat?'
   YES. AND THEN THE SECOND ROW.
   'Which one did you have in mind?'
   ALL OF THEM.
   The stranger remained bolt upright, the glasses with their burdens of syrup and assorted vegetation disappearing into the hood on a production line basis.
   This is it, the landlord thought, this is style, this is where I buy a red jacket and maybe put some monkey nuts and a few gherkins on the counter, get a few mirrors around the place, replace the sawdust. He picked up a beer-soaked cloth and gave the woodwork a few enthusiastic wipes, spreading the drips from the cordial glasses into a rainbow smear that took the varnish off. The last of the usual customers put on his hat and staggered out, muttering to himself.
   I DON'T SEE THE POINT, the stranger said.
   'Sorry?'
   WHAT IS SUPPOSED TO HAPPEN?
   'How many drinks have you had?'
   FORTY-SEVEN.
   'Just about anything, then,' said the barman and, because he knew his job and knew what was expected of him when people drank alone in the small hours, he started to polish a glass with the slops cloth and said, 'Your lady thrown you out, has she?'
   PARDON?
   'Drowning your sorrows, are you?'
   I HAVE NO SORROWS.
   'No, of course not. Forget I mentioned it.' He gave the glass a few more wipes. 'Just thought it helps to have someone to talk to,' he said.
   The stranger was silent for a moment, thinking. Then he said: YOU WANT TO TALK TO ME?
   'Yes. Sure. I'm a good listener.'
   NO-ONE EVER WANTED TO TALK TO ME BEFORE.
   'That's a shame.'
   THEY NEVER INVITE ME TO PARTIES, YOU KNOW.
   'Tch.'
   THEY ALL HATE ME. EVERYONE HATES ME. I DONT HAVE A SINGLE FRIEND.
   'Everyone ought to have a friend,' said the barman sagely.
   I THINK—
   'Yes?'
   I THINK . . . I THINK I COULD BE FRIENDS WITH THE GREEN BOTTLE.
   The landlord slid the octagon-bottle along the counter. Death took it and tilted it over the glass. The liquid tinkled on the rim.
   I'M DRUNK YOU THINK, DON'T YOU?
   'I serve anyone who can stand upright best out of three,' said the landlord.
   YOURRRE ABSOROOTLY RIGHT. BUT I—
   The stranger paused, one declamatory finger in the air.
   WAS WHAT I SAYING?
   'You said I thought you were drunk.'
   AH. YES,BUT I CAN BE SHOBER ANY TIME I LIKE. THIS ISH AN EXPERIMENT. AND NOW I WOULD LIKES TO EXPERIMENT WITH THE ORANGE BRANDY AGAIN.
   The landlord sighed, and glanced at the clock. There was no doubt that he was making a lot of money, especially since the stranger didn't seem inclined to worry about overcharging or short change. But it was getting late; in fact it was getting so late that it was getting early. There was also something about the solitary customer that unsettled him. People in The Mended Drum often drank as though there was no tomorrow, but this was the first time he'd actually felt they might be right.
   I MEAN, WHAT HAVE I GOT TO LOOK FORWARD TO? WHERE'S THE SENSE IN IT ALL? WHAT IS IT REALLY ALL ABOUT?
   'Can't say, my friend. I expect you'll feel better after a good night's sleep.'
   SLEEP? SLEEP? I NEVER SLEEP. I'M WOSSNAME, PROVERBIAL FOR IT.
   'Everyone needs their sleep. Even me,' he hinted.
   THEY ALL HATE ME, YOU KNOW.
   'Yes, you said. But it's a quarter to three.'
   The stranger turned unsteadily and looked around the silent room.
   THERE'S NO ONE IN THE PLACE BUT YOU AND I, he said.
   The landlord lifted up the flap and came around the bar, helping the stranger down from his stool.
   I HAVEN'T GOT A SINGLE FRIEND. EVEN CATS FIND ME AMUSING.
   A hand shot out and grabbed a bottle of Amanita Liquor before the man managed to propel its owner to the door, wondering how someone so thin could be so heavy.
   I DON'T HAVE TO BE DRUNK, I SAID. WHY DO PEOPLE LIKE TO BE DRUNK? IS IT FUN?
   'Helps them forget about life, old chap. Now just you lean there while I get the door open—'
   FORGET ABOUT LIFE. HA. HA.
   'You come back any time you like, y'hear?'
   YOU'D REALLY LIKE TO SEE ME AGAIN?
   The landlord looked back at the small heap of coins on the bar. That was worth a little weirdness. At least this one was a quiet one, and seemed to be harmless.
   'Oh, yes,' he said, propelling the stranger into the street and retrieving the bottle in one smooth movement. 'Drop in anytime.'
   THAT'S THE NICEHEST THING—
   The door slammed on the rest of the sentence.

   Ysabell sat up in bed.
   The knocking came again, soft and urgent. She pulled the covers up to her chin.
   'Who is it?' she whispered.
   'It's me, Mort,' came the hiss under the door. 'Let me in, please!'
   'Wait!'
   Ysabell scrambled frantically on the bedside table for the matches, knocking over a bottle of toilet water and dislodging a box of chocolates that was now mostly discarded wrappers. Once she'd got the candle alight she adjusted its position for maximum effect, tweaked the line of her nightdress into something more revealing, and said: 'It's not locked.'
   Mort staggered into the room, smelling of horses and frost and scumble.
   'I hope,' said Ysabell archly, 'that you have not forced your way in here in order to take advantage of your position in this household.'
   Mort looked around him. Ysabell was heavily into frills. Even the dressing table seemed to be wearing a petticoat. The whole room wasn't so much furnished as lingeried.
   'Look, I haven't got time to mess around,' he said. 'Bring that candle into the library. And for heaven's sake put on something sensible, you're overflowing.'
   Ysabell looked down, and then her head snapped up.
   'Well!'
   Mort poked his head back round the door. 'It's a matter of life and death,' he added, and disappeared.
   Ysabell watched the door creak shut after him, revealing the blue dressing gown with the tassels that Death had thought up for her as a present last Hogswatch and which she hadn't the heart to throw away, despite the fact that it was a size too small and had a rabbit on the pocket.
   Finally she swung her legs out of bed, slipped into the shameful dressing gown, and padded out into the corridor. Mort was waiting for her.
   'Won't father hear us?' she said.
   'He's not back. Come on.'
   'How can you tell?'
   'The place feels different when he's here. It's– it's like the difference between a coat when it's being worn and when it's hanging on a hook. Haven't you noticed?'
   'What are we doing that's so important?'
   Mort pushed open the library door. A gust of warm, dry air drifted out, and the door hinges issued a protesting creak.
   'We're going to save someone's life,' he said. 'A princess, actually.'
   Ysabell was instantly fascinated.
   'A real princess? I mean can she feel a pea through a dozen mattresses?'
   'Can she—?' Mort felt a minor worry disappear. 'Oh. Yes. I thought Albert had got it wrong.'
   'Are you in love with her?'
   Mort came to a standstill between the shelves, aware of the busy little scritchings inside the book covers.
   'It's hard to be sure,' he said. 'Do I look it?'
   'You look a bit flustered. How does she feel about you?'
   'Don't know.'
   'Ah,' said Ysabell knowingly, in the tones of an expert. 'Unrequited love is the worst kind. It's probably not a good idea to go taking poison or killing yourself, though,' she added thoughtfully. 'What are we doing here? Do you want to find her book to see if she marries you?'
   'I've read it, and she's dead,' said Mort. 'But only technically. I mean, not really dead.'
   'Good, otherwise that would be necromancy. What are we looking for?'
   'Albert's biography.'
   'What for? I don't think he's got one.'
   'Everyone's got one.'
   'Well, he doesn't like people asking personal questions. I looked for it once and I couldn't find it. Albert by itself isn't much to go on. Why is he so interesting?' Ysabell lit a couple of candles from the one in her hand and filled the library with dancing shadows.
   'I need a powerful wizard and I think he's one.'
   'What, Albert?'
   'Yes. Only we're looking for Alberto Malich. He's more than two thousand years old, I think.'
   'What, Albert?'
   'Yes. Albert.'
   'He never wears a wizard's hat,' said Ysabell doubtfully.
   'He lost it. Anyway, the hat isn't compulsory. Where do we start looking?'
   'Well, if you're sure . . . the Stack, I suppose. That's where father puts all the biographies that are more than five hundred years old. It's this way.'
   She led the way past the whispering shelves to a door set in a cul-de-sac. It opened with some effort and the groan of the hinges reverberated around the library; Mort fancied for a moment that all the books paused momentarily in their work just to listen.
   Steps led down into the velvet gloom. There were cobwebs and dust, and air that smelled as though it had been locked in a pyramid for a thousand years.
   'People don't come down here very often,' said Ysabell. 'I'll lead the way.'
   Mort felt something was owed.
   'I must say,' he said, 'you're a real brick.'
   'You mean pink, square and dumpy? You really know how to talk to a girl, my boy.'
   'Mort,' said Mort automatically.
   The Stack was as dark and silent as a cave deep underground. The shelves were barely far enough apart for one person to walk between them, and towered up well beyond the dome of candlelight. They were particularly eerie because they were silent. There were no more lives to write; the books slept. But Mort felt that they slept like cats, with one eye open. They were aware.
   'I came down here once,' said Ysabell, whispering. 'If you go far enough along the shelves the books run out and there's clay tablets and lumps of stone and animal skins and everyone's called Ug and Zog.'
   The silence was almost tangible. Mort could feel the books watching them as they tramped through the hot, silent passages. Everyone who had ever lived was here somewhere, right back to the first people that the gods had baked out of mud or whatever. They didn't exactly resent him, they were just wondering about why he was here.
   'Did you get past Ug and Zog?' he hissed. There's a lot of people would be very interested to know what's there.'
   'I got frightened. It's a long way and I didn't have enough candles.'
   'Pity.'
   Ysabell stopped so sharply that Mort cannoned into the back of her.
   'This would be about the right area,' she said. 'What now?'
   Mort peered at the faded names on the spines.
   'They don't seem to be in any order!' he moaned.
   They looked up. They wandered down a couple of side alleys. They pulled a few books off the lowest shelves at random, raising pillows of dust.
   'This is silly,' said Mort at last. There's millions of lives here. The chances of finding his are worse than—'
   Ysabell laid her hand against his mouth.
   'Listen!'
   Mort mumbled a bit through her fingers and then got the message. He strained his ears, striving to hear anything above the heavy hiss of absolute silence.
   And then he found it. A faint, irritable scratching. High, high overhead, somewhere in the impenetrable darkness on the cliff of shelves, a life was still being written.
   They looked at each other, their eyes widening. Then Ysabell said, 'We passed a ladder back there. On wheels.'
   The little castors on the bottom squeaked as Mort rolled it back. The top end moved too, as if it was fixed to another set of wheels somewhere up in the darkness.
   'Right,' he said. 'Give me the candle, and—'
   'If the candle's going up, then so am I,' said Ysabell firmly. 'You stop down here and move the ladder when I say. And don't argue.'
   'It might be dangerous up there,' said Mort gallantly.
   'It might be dangerous down here,' Ysabell pointed out. 'So I'll be up the ladder with the candle, thank you.'
   She set her foot on the bottom rung and was soon no more than a frilly shadow outlined in a halo of candlelight that soon began to shrink.
   Mort steadied the ladder and tried not to think of all the lives pressing in on him. Occasionally a meteor of hot wax would thump into the floor beside him, raising a crater in the dust. Ysabell was now a faint glow far above, and he could feel every footstep as it vibrated down the ladder.
   She stopped. It seemed to be for quite a long time.
   Then her voice floated down, deadened by the weight of silence around them.
   'Mort, I've found it.'
   'Good. Bring it down.'
   'Mort, you were right.'
   'Okay, thanks. Now bring it down,'
   'Yes, Mort, but which one?'
   'Don't mess about, that candle won't last much longer.'
   'Mort!'
   'What?'
   'Mort, there's a wholeshelf!'

   Now it really was dawn, that cusp of the day that belonged to no one except the seagulls in Morpork docks, the tide that rolled in up the river, and a warm turnwise wind that added a smell of spring to the complex odour of the city.
   Death sat on a bollard, looking out to sea. He had decided to stop being drunk. It made his head ache.
   He'd tried fishing, dancing, gambling and drink, allegedly four of life's greatest pleasures, and wasn't sure that he saw the point. Food he was happy with– Death liked a good meal as much as anyone else. He couldn't think of any other pleasures of the flesh or, rather, he could, but they were, well,fleshy, and he couldn't see how it would be possible to go about them without some major bodily restructuring, which he wasn't going to contemplate. Besides, humans seemed to leave off doing them as they grew older, so presumably they couldn't be that attractive.
   Death began to feel that he wouldn't understand people as long as he lived.
   The sun made the cobbles steam and Death felt the faintest tingling of that little springtime urge that can send a thousand tons of sap pumping through fifty feet of timber in a forest.
   The seagulls swooped and dived around him. A one-eyed cat, down to its eighth life and its last ear, emerged from its lair in a heap of abandoned fish boxes, stretched, yawned, and rubbed itself against his legs. The breeze, cutting through Ankh's famous smell, brought a hint of spices and fresh bread.
   Death was bewildered. He couldn't fight it. He was actually feeling glad to be alive, and very reluctant to be Death.
   I MUST BE SICKENING FOR SOMETHING, he thought.

   Mort eased himself up the ladder alongside Ysabell. It was shaky, but seemed to be safe. At least the height didn't bother him; everything below was just blackness.
   Some of Albert's earlier volumes were very nearly falling apart. He reached out for one at random, feeling the ladder tremble underneath them as he did so, brought it back and opened it somewhere in the middle.
   'Move the candle this way,' he said.
   'Can you read it?'
   'Sort of—'
   — "turnered hys hand, butt was sorelie vexed that alle menne at laste comme to nort, viz. Deathe, and vowed hymme to seke Imortalitie yn his pride. 'Thus,' he tolde the younge wizzerds, 'we may take unto ourselfes the mantel of Goddes.' Thee next day, yt being raining, Alberto" —
   'It's written in Old,' he said. 'Before they invented spelling. Let's have a look at the latest one.'
   It was Albert all right. Mort caught several references to fried bread.
   'Let's have a look at what he's doing now,' said Ysabell.
   'Do you think we should? It's a bit like spying.'
   'So what? Scared?'
   'All right.'
   He flicked through until he came to the unfilled pages, and then turned back until he found the story of Albert's life, crawling across the page at surprising speed considering it was the middle of the night; most biographies didn't have much to say about sleep, unless the dreams were particularly vivid.
   'Hold the candle properly, will you? I don't want to get grease on his life.'
   'Why not? He likes grease.'
   'Stop giggling, you'll have us both off. Now look at this bit. . . .
   — 'He crept through the dusty darkness of the Stack —' Ysabell read – 'his eyes fixed on the tiny glow of candlelight high above. Prying, he thought, poking away at things that shouldn't concern them, the little devils' —
   'Mort! He's—'
   'Shut up! I'm reading!'
   — 'soon put a stop to this. Albert crept silently to the foot of the ladder, spat on his hands, and got ready to push. The master'd never know; he was acting strange these days and it was all that lad's fault, and' —
   Mort looked up into Ysabell's horrified eyes.
   Then the girl took the book out of Mort's hand, held it at arm's length while her gaze remained fixed woodenly on his, and let it go.
   Mort watched her lips move and then realized that he, too, was counting under his breath.
   Three, four—
   There was a dull thump, a muffled cry, and silence.
   'Do you think you've killed him?' said Mort, after a while.
   'What,here? Anyway, I didn't notice any better ideas coming from you.'
   'No, but– he is an old man, after all.'
   'No, he's not,' said Ysabell sharply, starting down the ladder.
   'Two thousand years?'
   'Not a day over sixty-seven.'
   'The books said—'
   'I told you, time doesn't apply here. Notreal time. Don't you listen, boy?'
   'Mort,' said Mort.
   'And stop treading on my fingers, I'm going as fast as I can.'
   'Sorry.'
   'And don't act so wet. Have you any idea how boring it is living here?'
   'Probably not,' said Mort, adding with genuine longing, 'I've heard about boredom but I've never had a chance to try it.'
   'It's dreadful.'
   'If it comes to that, excitement isn't all it's cracked up to be.'
   'Anything's got to be better than this.'
   There was a groan from below, and then a stream of swearwords.
   Ysabell peered into the gloom.
   'Obviously I didn't damage his cursing muscles,' she said. 'I don't think I ought to listen to words like that. It could be bad for my moral fibre.'
   They found Albert slumped against the foot of the bookshelf, muttering and holding his arm.
   'There's no need to make that kind of fuss,' said Ysabell briskly. 'You're not hurt; father simply doesn't allow that kind of thing to happen.'
   'What did you have to go and do that for?' he moaned. 'I didn't mean any harm.'
   'You were going to push us off,' said Mort, trying to help him up. 'I read it. I'm surprised you didn't use magic.'
   Albert glared at him.
   'Oh, so you've found out, have you?' he said quietly. 'Then much good may it do you. You've no right to go prying.'
   He struggled to his feet, shook off Mort's hand, and stumbled back along the hushed shelves.
   'No, wait,' said Mort, 'I need your help!'
   'Well, of course,' said Albert over his shoulder. 'It stands to reason, doesn't it? You thought, I'll just go and pry into someone's private life and then I'll drop it on him and then I'll ask him to help me.'
   'I only wanted to find out if you were really you,' said Mort, running after him.
   'I am. Everyone is.'
   'But if you don't help me something terrible will happen! There's this princess, and she—'
   Terrible things happen all the time, boy—'
   '— Mort —'
   '— and no one expects me to do anything about it.'
   'But you were the greatest!'
   Albert stopped for a moment, but did not look around.
   'Was the greatest,was the greatest. And don't you try to butter me up. I ain't butterable.'
   'They've got statues to you and everything,' said Mort, trying not to yawn.
   'More fool them, then.' Albert reached the foot of the steps into the library proper, stamped up them and stood outlined against the candlelight from the library.
   'You mean you won't help?' said Mort. 'Not even if you can?'
   'Give the boy a prize,' growled Albert. 'And it's no good thinking you can appeal to my better nature under this here crusty exterior,' he added, 'cos my interior's pretty damn crusty too.'
   They heard him cross the library floor as though he had a grudge against it, and slam the door behind him.
   'Well,' said Mort, uncertainly.
   'What did you expect?' snapped Ysabell. 'He doesn't care for anyone much except father.'
   'It's just that I thought someone like him would help if I explained it properly,' said Mort. He sagged. The rush of energy that had propelled him through the long night had evaporated, filling his mind with lead. 'You know he was a famous wizard?'
   'That doesn't mean anything, wizards aren't necessarily nice. Do not meddle in the affairs of wizards because a refusal often offends, I read somewhere.' Ysabell stepped closer to Mort and peered at him with some concern. 'You look like something left on a plate,' she said.
   ' 'M okay,' said Mort, walking heavily up the steps and into the scratching shadows of the library.
   'You're not. You could do with a good night's sleep, my lad.'
   'M't,' murmured Mort.
   He felt Ysabell slip his arm over her shoulder. The walls were moving gently, even the sound of his own voice was coming from a long way off, and he dimly felt how nice it would be to stretch out on a nice stone slab and sleep forever.
   Death'd be back soon, he told himself, feeling his unprotesting body being helped along the corridors. There was nothing for it, he'd have to tell Death. He wasn't such a bad old stick. Death would help; all he needed to do was explain things. And then he could stop all this worrying and go to slee....

   'And what was your previous position?'
   I BEG YOUR PARDON?
   'What did you do for a living?' said the thin young man behind the desk.
   The figure opposite him shifted uneasily.
   I USHERED SOULS INTO THE NEXT WORLD. I WAS THE GRAVE OF ALL HOPE. I WAS THE ULTIMATE REALITY. I WAS THE ASSASSIN AGAINST WHOM NO LOCK WOULD HOLD.
   'Yes, point taken, but do you have any particular skills?'
   Death thought about it.
   I SUPPOSE A CERTAIN AMOUNT OF EXPERTISE WITH AGRICULTURAL IMPLEMENTS? he ventured after a while.
   The young man shook his head firmly.
   NO?
   'This is a city, Mr—' he glanced down, and once again felt a faint unease that he couldn't quite put his finger on – 'Mr – Mr – Mr, and we're a bit short of fields.'
   He laid down his pen and gave the kind of smile that suggested he'd learned it from a book.
   Ankh-Morpork wasn't advanced enough to possess an employment exchange. People took jobs because their fathers made room for them, or because their natural talent found an opening, or by word-of-mouth. But there was a call for servants and menial workers, and with the commercial sections of the city beginning to boom the thin young man– a Mr Liona Keeble – had invented the profession of job broker and was, right at this moment, finding it difficult.
   'My dear Mr—' he glanced down – 'Mr, we get many people coming into the city from outside because, alas, they believe life is richer here. Excuse me for saying so, but you seem to me to be a gentleman down on his luck. I would have thought you would have preferred something rather more refined than —' he glanced down again, and frowned – ' "something nice working with cats or flowers".'
   I'M SORRY. I FELT IT WAS TIME FOR A CHANGE.
   'Can you play a musical instrument ?'
   NO.
   'Can you do carpentry?'
   I DO NOT KNOW, I HAVE NEVER TRIED. Death tared at his feet. He was beginning to feel deeply embarrassed.
   Keeble shuffled the paper on his desk, and sighed.
   I CAN WALK THROUGH WALLS, Death volunteered, aware that the conversation had reached an impasse.
   Keeble looked up brightly. 'I'd like to see that,' he said. 'That could be quite a qualification.'
   RIGHT.
   Death pushed his chair back and stalked confidently towards the nearest wall.
   OUCH.
   Keeble watched expectantly. 'Go on, then,' he said.
   UM. THIS IS AN ORDINARY WALL, IS IT?
   'I assume so. I'm not an expert.'
   IT SEEMS TO BE PRESENTING ME WITH SOME DIFFICULTY.
   'So it would appear.'
   WHAT DO YOU CALL THE FEELING OF BEING VERY SMALL AND HOT?
   Keeble twiddled his pencil.
   'Pygmy?'
   BEGINS WITH AN M.
   'Embarrassing?'
   'YES,' said Death, I MEAN YES.
   'It would seem that you have no useful skill or talent whatsoever,' he said. 'Have you thought of going into teaching?'
   Death's face was a mask of terror. Well, it was always a mask of terror, but this time he meant it to be.
   'You see,' said Keeble kindly, putting down his pen and steepling his hands together, 'it's very seldom I ever have to find a new career for an– what was it again?'
   ANTHROPOMORPHIC PERSONIFICATION.
   'Oh, yes. Whatis that, exactly?'
   Death had had enough.
   THIS, he said.
   For a moment, just for a moment, Mr Keeble saw him clearly. His face went nearly as pale as Death's own. His hands jerked convulsively. His heart gave a stutter.
   Death watched him with mild interest, then drew an hourglass from the depths of his robe and held it up to the light and examined it critically.
   SETTLE DOWN, he said, YOU'VE GOT A GOOD FEW YEARS YET.
   'Bbbbbbb—'
   I COULD TELL YOU HOW MANY IF YOU LIKE.
   Keeble, fighting to breathe, managed to shake his head.
   DO YOU WANT ME TO GET YOU A GLASS OF WATER, THEN?
   'nnN– nnN.'
   The shop bell jangled. Keeble's eyes rolled. Death decided that he owed the man something. He shouldn't be allowed to lose custom, which was clearly something humans valued dearly.
   He pushed aside the bead curtain and stalked into the outer shop, where a small fat woman, looking rather like an angry cottage loaf, was hammering on the counter with a haddock.
   'It's about that cook's job up at the University,' she said. 'You told me it was a good position and it's a disgrace up there, the tricks them students play, and I demand– I want you to – I'm not.
   Her voice trailed off.
   ' 'Ere,' she said, but you could tell her heart wasn't in it, 'you're not Keeble, are you?'
   Death stared at her. He'd never before experienced an unsatisfied customer. He was at a loss. Finally he gave up.
   BEGONE, YOU BLACK AND MIDNIGHT HAG, he said.
   The cook's small eyes narrowed.
   ' 'Oo are you calling a midnight bag?' she said accusingly, and hit the counter with the fish again. 'Look at this,' she said. 'Last night it was my bedwarmer, in the morning it's a fish. I ask you.'
   MAY ALL THE DEMONS OF HELL REND YOUR LIVING SPIRIT IF YOU DON'T GET OUT OF THE SHOP THIS MINUTE, Death tried.
   'I don't know about that, but what about my bedwarmer? It's no place for a respectable woman up there, they tried to—'
   IF YOU WOULD CARE TO GO AWAY, said Death desperately, I WILL GIVE YOU SOME MONEY.
   'How much?' said the cook, with a speed that would have outdistanced a striking rattlesnake and given lightning a nasty shock.
   Death pulled out his coin bag and tipped a heap of verdigrised and darkened coins on the counter. She regarded them with deep suspicion.
   NOW LEAVE UPON THE INSTANT, said Death, and added, BEFORE THE SEARING WINDS OF INFINITY SCORCH THY WORTHLESS CARCASS.
   'My husband will be told about this,' said the cook darkly, as she left the shop. It seemed to Death that no threat of his could possibly be as dire.
   He stalked back through the curtains. Keeble, still slumped in his chair, gave a kind of strangled gurgle.
   'It was true!' he said. 'I thought you were a nightmare!'
   I COULD TAKE OFFENCE AT THAT, said Death.
   'You really are Death?' said Keeble.
   YES.
   'Why didn't you say?'
   PEOPLE USUALLY PREFER ME NOT TO.
   Keeble scrabbled among his papers, giggling hysterically.
   'You want to do something else?' he said. Tooth fairy? Water sprite? Sandman?'
   DO NOT BE FOOLISH. I SIMPLY– FEEL I WANT A CHANGE.
   Keeble's frantic rustling at last turned up the paper he'd been searching for. He gave a maniacal laugh and thrust it into Death's hands.
   Death read it.
   THIS IS A JOB? PEOPLE ARE PAID TO DO THIS?
   'Yes, yes, go and see him, you're just the right type. Only don't tell him I sent you.'

   Binky moved at a hard gallop across the night, the Disc unrolling far below his hooves. Now Mort found that the sword could reach out further than he had thought, it could reach the stars themselves, and he swung it across the deeps of space and into the heart of a yellow dwarf which went nova most satisfactorily. He stood in the saddle and whirled the blade around his head, laughing as the blue flame fanned across the sky leaving a trail of darkness and embers.
   And didn't stop. Mort struggled as the sword cut through the horizon, grinding down the mountains, drying up the seas, turning green forests into punk and ashes. He heard voices behind him, and the brief screams of friends and relatives as he turned desperately. Dust storms whirled from the dead earth as he fought to release his own grip, but the sword burned icy cold in his hand, dragging him on in a dance that would not end until there was nothing left alive.
   And that time came, and Mort stood alone except for Death, who said, 'A fine job, boy.'
   And Mort said, MORT.
   'Mort! Mort! Wake up!'
   Mort surfaced slowly, like a corpse in a pond. He fought against it, clinging to his pillow and the horrors of sleep, but someone was tugging urgently at his ear.
   'Mmmph?' he said.
   'Mort!'
   'Wsst?'
   'Mort, it's father!'
   He opened his eyes and stared up blankly into Ysabell's face. Then the events of the previous night hit him like a sock full of damp sand.
   Mort swung his legs out of bed, still wreathed in the remains of his dream.
   'Yeah, okay,' he said. 'I'' go and see him directly.'
   'He's not here! Albert's going crazy!' Ysabell stood by the bed, tugging a handkerchief between her hands. 'Mort, do you think something bad has happened to him?'
   He gave her a blank look. 'Don't be bloody stupid,' he said, 'he's Death.' He scratched his skin. He felt hot and dry and itchy.
   'But he's never been away this long! Not even when there was that big plague in Pseudopolis! I mean, he has to be here in the mornings to do the books and work out the nodes and—'
   Mort grabbed her arms. 'All right, all right,' he said, as soothingly as he could manage. 'I'm sure everything's okay. Just settle down, I'll go and check . . . why have you got your eyes shut?'
   'Mort, please put some clothes on,' said Ysabell in a tight little voice.
   Mort looked down.
   'Sorry,' he said meekly, 'I didn't realize . . . Who put me to bed?'
   'I did,' she said. 'But I looked the other way.'
   Mort dragged on his breeches, shrugged into his shirt and hurried out towards Death's study with Ysabell on his heels. Albert was in there, jumping from foot to foot like a duck on a griddle. When Mort came in the look on the old man's face could almost have been gratitude.
   Mort saw with amazement that there were tears in his eyes.
   'His chair hasn't been sat in,' Albert whined.
   'Sorry, but is that important?' said Mort. 'My grandad didn't used to come home for days if he'd had a good sale at the market.'
   'But he's always here,' said Albert. 'Every morning, as long as I've known him, sitting here at his desk a-working on the nodes. It's his job. He wouldn't miss it.'
   'I expect the nodes can look after themselves for a day or two,' said Mort.
   The drop in temperature told him he was wrong. He looked at their faces.
   They can't?' he said.
   Both heads shook.
   'If the nodes aren't worked out properly all the Balance is destroyed,' said Ysabell. 'Anything could happen.'
   'Didn't he explain?' said Albert.
   'Not really. I've really only done the practical side. He said he'd tell me about the theoretical stuff later,' said Mort. Ysabell burst into tears.
   Albert took Mort's arm and, with considerable dramatic waggling of his eyebrows, indicated that they should have a little talk in the corner. Mort trailed after him reluctantly.
   The old man rummaged in his pockets and at last produced a battered paper bag.
   'Peppermint?' he enquired.
   Mort shook his head.
   'He never tell you about the nodes?' said Albert.
   Mort shook' his head again. Albert gave his peppermint a suck; it sounded like the plughole in the bath of God.
   'How old are you, lad?'
   'Mort. I'm sixteen.'
   'There's some things a lad ought to be told before he's sixteen,' said Albert, looking over his shoulder at Ysabell, who was sobbing in Death's chair.
   'Oh, I know aboutthat. My father told me all about that when we used to take the thargas to be mated. When a man and a woman—'
   'About the universe is what I meant,' said Albert hurriedly. 'I mean, have you ever thought about it?'
   'I know the Disc is carried through space on the backs of four elephants that stand on the shell of Great A'Tuin,' said Mort.
   'That's just part of it. I meant the whole universe of time and space and life and death and day and night and everything.'
   'Can't say I've ever given it much thought,' said Mort.
   'Ah. You ought. The point is, the nodes are part of it. They stop death from getting out of control, see. Not him, not Death. Just death itself. Like, uh—' Albert struggled for words – 'like, death should come exactly at the end of life, see, and not before or after, and the nodes have to be worked out so that the key figures . . . you're not taking this in, are you?'
   'Sorry.'
   'They've got to be worked out,' said Albert flatly, 'and then the correct lives have got to be got. The hourglasses, you call them. The actual Duty is the easy job.'
   'Can you do it?'
   'No. Can you?'
   'No!'
   Albert sucked reflectively at his peppermint. That's the whole world in the gyppo, then,' he said.
   'Look, I can't see why you're so worried. I expect he's just got held up somewhere,' said Mort, but it sounded feeble even to him. It wasn't as though people buttonholed Death to tell him another story, or clapped him on the back and said things like 'You've got time for a quick half in there, my old mate, no need to rush off home' or invited him to make up a skittles team and come out for a Klatchian take-away afterwards, or . . . It struck Mort with sudden, terrible poignancy that Death must be the loneliest creature in the universe. In the great party of Creation, he was always in the kitchen.
   'I'm sure I don't know what's come over the master lately,' mumbled Albert. 'Out of the chair, my girl. Let's have a look at these nodes.'
   They opened the ledger.
   They looked at it for a long time.
   Then Mort said, 'What do all those symbols mean?'
   'Sodomy non sapiens,' said Albert under his breath.
   'What does that mean?'
   'Means I'm buggered if I know.'
   That was wizard talk, wasn't it?' said Mort.
   'You shut up about wizard talk. I don't know anything about wizard talk. You apply your brain to this here.'
   Mort looked down again at the tracery of lines. It was as if a spider had spun a web on the page, stopping at every junction to make notes. Mort stared until his eyes hurt, waiting for some spark of inspiration. None volunteered.
   'Any luck?'
   'It's all Klatchian to me,' said Mort. 'I don't even know whether it should be read upside down or sideways.'
   'Spiralling from the centre outwards,' sniffed Ysabell from her seat in the corner.
   Their heads collided as they both peered at the centre of the page. They stared at her. She shrugged.
   'Father taught me how to read the node chart,' she said, 'when I used to do my sewing in here. He used to read bits out.'
   'You can help?' said Mort.
   'No,' said Ysabell. She blew her nose.
   'What do you mean, no?' growled Albert. "This is too important for any flighty—'
   'I mean,' said Ysabell, in razor tones, 'that I can do them and you can help.'

   The Ankh-Morpork Guild of Merchants has taken to hiring large gangs of men with ears like fists and fists like large bags of walnuts whose job it is to re-educate those misguided people who publicly fail to recognize the many attractive points of their fine city. For example the philosopher Catroaster was found floating face downward in the river within hours of uttering the famous line, 'When a man is tired of Ankh-Morpork, he is tired of ankle-deep slurry.'
   Therefore it is prudent to dwell on one– of the very many, of course – on one of the things that makes Ankh-Morpork renowned among the great cities of the multiverse.
   This is its food.
   The trade routes of half the Disc pass through the city or down its rather sluggish river. More than half the tribes and races of the Disc have representatives dwelling within its sprawling acres. In Ankh-Morpork the cuisines of the world collide: on the menu are one thousand types of vegetable, fifteen hundred cheeses, two thousand spices, three hundred types of meat, two hundred fowl, five hundred different kinds of fish, one hundred variations on the theme of pasta, seventy eggs of one kind or another, fifty insects, thirty molluscs, twenty assorted snakes and other reptiles, and something pale brown and warty known as the Klatchian migratory bog truffle.
   Its eating establishments range from the opulent, where the portions are tiny but the plates are silver, to the secretive, where some of the Disc's more exotic inhabitants are rumoured to eat anything they can get down their throat best out of three.
   Harga's House of Ribs down by the docks is probably not numbered among the city's leading eateries, catering as it does for the type of beefy clientele that prefers quantity and breaks up the tables if it doesn't get it. They don't go in for the fancy or exotic, but stick to conventional food like flightless bird embryos, minced organs in intestine skins, slices of hog flesh and burnt ground grass seeds dipped in animal fats; or, as it is known in their patois, egg, soss and bacon and a fried slice.
   It was the kind of eating house that didn't need a menu. You just looked at Harga's vest.
   Still, he had to admit, this new cook seemed to be the business. Harga, an expansive advert for his own high carbohydrate merchandise, beamed at a room full of satisfied customers. And a fast worker, too! In fact, disconcertingly fast.
   He rapped on the hatch.
   'Double egg, chips, beans, and a trollburger, hold the onions,' he rasped.
   RIGHT.
   The hatch slid up a few seconds later and two plates were pushed through. Harga shook his head in gratified amazement.
   It had been like that all evening. The eggs were bright and shiny, the beans glistened like rubies, and the chips were the crisp golden brown of sunburned bodies on expensive beaches. Harga's last cook had turned out chips like little paper bags full of pus.
   Harga looked around the steamy cafe. No one was watching him. He was going to get to the bottom of this. He rapped on the hatch again.
   'Alligator sandwich,' he said. 'And make it sna—'
   The hatch shot up. After a few seconds to pluck up enough courage, Harga peered under the top slice of the long saur in front of him. He wasn't saying that it was alligator, and he wasn't saying it wasn't. He knuckled the hatch again.
   'Okay,' he said, I'm not complaining, I just want to know how you did it so fast.'
   TIME IS NOT IMPORTANT.
   'You say?'
   RIGHT.
   Harga decided not to argue.
   'Well, you're doing a damn fine job in there, boy,' he said.
   WHAT IS IT CALLED WHEN YOU FEEL WARM AND CONTENT AND WISH THINGS WOULD STAY THAT WAY?
   'I guess you'd call it happiness,' said Harga.
   Inside the tiny, cramped kitchen, strata'd with the grease of decades, Death spun and whirled, chopping, slicing and flying. His skillet flashed through the fetid steam.
   He'd opened the door to the cold night air, and a dozen neighbourhood cats had strolled in, attracted by the bowls of milk and meat– some of Harga's best, if he'd known – that had been strategically placed around the floor. Occassionally Death would pause in his work and scratch one of them behind the ears.
   'Happiness,' he said, and puzzled at the sound of his own voice.

   Cutwell, the wizard and Royal Recognizer by appointment, pulled himself up the last of the tower steps and leaned against the wall, waiting for his heart to stop thumping.
   Actually it wasn't particularly high, this tower, just high for Sto Lat. In general design and outline it looked the standard sort of tower for imprisoning princesses in; it was mainly used to store old furniture.
   However, it offered unsurpassed views of the city and the Sto plain, which is to say, you could see an awful lot of cabbages.
   Cutwell made it as far as the crumbling crenellations atop the wall and looked out at the morning haze. It was, maybe, a little hazier than usual. If he tried hard he could imagine a flicker in the sky. If he really strained his imagination he could hear a buzzing out over the cabbage fields, a sound like someone frying locusts. He shivered.
   At a time like this his hands automatically patted his pockets, and found nothing but half a bag of jelly babies, melted into a sticky mass, and an apple core. Neither offered much consolation.
   What Cutwell wanted was what any normal wizard wanted at a time like this, which was a smoke. He'd have killed for a cigar, and would have gone as far as a flesh wound for a squashed dog-end. He pulled himself together. Resolution was good for the moral fibre; the only trouble was the fibre didn't appreciate the sacrifices he was making for it. They said that a truly great wizard should be permanently under tension. You could have used Cutwell for a bowstring.
   He turned his back on the brassica-ed landscape and made his way back down the winding steps to the main part of the palace.
   Still, he told himself, the campaign appeared to be working. The population didn't seem to be resisting the fact that there was going to be a coronation, although they weren't exactly clear about who was going to be crowned. There was going to be bunting in the streets and Cutwell had arranged for the town square's main fountain to run, if not with wine, then at least with an acceptable beer made from broccoli. There was going to be folk dancing, at sword point if necessary. There would be races for children. There would be an ox roast. The royal coach had been regilded and Cutwell was optimistic that people could be persuaded to notice it as it went by.
   The High Priest at the Temple of Blind Io was going to be a problem. Cutwell had marked him down as a dear old soul whose expertise with the knife was so unreliable that half of the sacrifices got tired of waiting and wandered away. The last time he'd tried to sacrifice a goat it had time to give birth to twins before he could focus, and then the courage of motherhood had resulted in it chasing the entire priesthood out of the temple.
   The chances of him succeeding in putting the crown on the right person even in normal circumstances were only average, Cutwell had calculated; he'd have to stand alongside the old boy and try tactfully to guide his shaking hands.
   Still, even that wasn't the big problem. The big problem was much bigger than that. The big problem had been sprung on him by the Chancellor after breakfast.
   'Fireworks?' Cutwell had said.
   'That's the sort of thing you wizard fellows are supposed to be good at, isn't it?' said the Chancellor, as crusty as a week-old loaf. 'Flashes and bangs and whatnot. I remember a wizard when I was a lad—'
   'I'm afraid I don't know anything about fireworks,' said Cutwell, in tones designed to convey that he cherished this ignorance.
   'Lots of rockets,' the Chancellor reminisced happily. 'Ankhian candles. Thunderflashes. And thingies that you can hold in your hand. It's not a proper coronation without fireworks.'
   'Yes, but, you see—'
   'Good man,' said the Chancellor briskly, 'knew we could rely on you. Plenty of rockets, you understand, and to finish with there must be a set-piece, mind you, something really breathtaking like a portrait of– of —' his eyes glazed over in a way that was becoming depressingly familiar to Cutwell.
   'The Princess Keli,' he said wearily.
   'Ah. Yes. Her,' said the Chancellor. 'A portrait of– who you said – in fireworks. Of course, it's probably all pretty simple stuff to you wizards, but the people like it. Nothing like a good blowout and a blowup and a bit of balcony waving to keep the loyalty muscles in tip-top shape, that's what I always say. See to it. Rockets. With runes on.'
   An hour ago Cutwell had thumbed through the index ofThe Monster Fun Grimoire and had cautiously assembled a number of common household ingredients and put a match to them.
   Funny thing about eyebrows, he mused. You never really noticed them until they'd gone.
   Red around the eyes, and smelling slightly of smoke, Cutwell ambled towards the royal apartments past bevies of maids engaged in whatever it was maids did, which always seemed to take at least three of them. Whenever they saw Cutwell they would usually go silent, hurry past with their heads down and then break into muffled giggles along the corridor. This annoyed Cutwell. Not– he told himself quickly – because of any personal considerations, but because wizards ought to be shown more respect. Besides, some of the maids had a way of looking at him which caused him to think distinctly unwizardly thoughts.
   Truly, he thought, the way of enlightenment is like unto half a mile of broken glass.
   He knocked on the door of Keli's suite. A maid opened it.
   'Is your mistress in?' he said, as haughtily as he could manage.
   The maid put her hand to her mouth. Her shoulders shook. Her eyes sparkled. A sound like escaping steam crept between her fingers.
   I can't help it, Cutwell thought, I just seem to have this amazing effect on women.
   'Is it a man?' came Keli's voice from within. The maid's eyes glazed over and she tilted her head, as if not sure of what she had heard.
   'It's me, Cutwell,' said Cutwell.
   'Oh, that's all right, then. You can come in.'
   Cutwell pushed past the girl and tried to ignore the muffled laughter as the maid fled the room. Of course, everyone knew a wizard didn't need a chaperon. It was just the tone of the princess's 'Oh, that's all right then' that made him writhe inside.
   Keli was sitting at her dressing table, brushing her hair. Very few men in the world ever find out what a princess wears under her dresses, and Cutwell joined them with extreme reluctance but with remarkable self-control. Only the frantic bobbing of his adam's apple betrayed him. There was no doubt about it, he'd be no good for magic fordays.
   She turned and he caught a whiff of talcum powder. Forweeks, dammit, forweeks.
   'You look a bit hot, Cutwell. Is something the matter?'
   'Naarg.'
   'I'm sorry?'
   He shook himself. Concentrate on the hairbrush, man, the hairbrush. 'Just a bit of magical experimenting, ma'am. Only superficial burns.'
   'Isit still moving?'
   'I am afraid so.'
   Keli turned back to the mirror. Her face was set.
   'Have we got time?'
   This was the bit he'd been dreading. He'd done everything he could. The Royal Astrologer had been sobered up long enough to insist that tomorrow was the only possible day the ceremony could take place, so Cutwell had arranged for it to begin one second after midnight. He'd ruthlessly cut the score of the royal trumpet fanfare. He'd timed the High Priest's invocation to the gods and then subedited heavily; there was going to be a row when the gods found out. The ceremony of the anointing with sacred oils had been cut to a quick dab behind the ears. Skateboards were an unknown invention on the Disc; if they hadn't been, Keli's trip up the aisle would have been unconstitutionally fast. And it still wasn't enough. He nerved himself.
   'I think possibly not,' he said. 'It could be a very close thing.'
   He saw her glare at him in the mirror.
   'How close?'
   'Um. Very.'
   'Are you trying to say it might reach us at the same time as the ceremony?'
   'Um. More sort of, um, before it,' said Cutwell wretchedly. There was no sound but the drumming of Keli's fingers on the edge of the table. Cutwell wondered if she was going to break down, or smash the mirror. Instead she said:
   'How do you know?'
   He wondered if he could get away with saying something like, I'm a wizard, we know these things, but decided against it. The last time he'd said that she'd threatened him with the axe.
   'I asked one of the guards about that inn Mort talked about,' he said. Then I worked out the approximate distance it had to travel. Mort said it was moving at a slow walking pace, and I reckon his stride is about—'
   'As simple as that? You didn't use magic?'
   'Only common sense. It's a lot more reliable in the long run.'
   She reached out and patted his hand.
   'Poor old Cutwell,' she said.
   'I am only twenty, ma'am.'
   She stood up and walked over to her dressing room. One of the things you learn when you're a princess is always to be older than anyone of inferior rank.
   'Yes, I suppose there must be such things as young wizards,' she said over her shoulder. 'It's just that people always think of them as old. I wonder why this is?'
   'Rigours of the calling, ma'am,' said Cutwell, rolling his eyes. He could hear the rustle of silk.
   'What made you decide to become a wizard?' Her voice was muffled, as if she had something over her head.
   'It's indoor work with no heavy lifting,' said Cutwell. 'And I suppose I wanted to learn how the world worked.'
   'Have you succeeded, then?'
   'No.' Cutwell wasn't much good at small talk, otherwise he'd never have let his mind wander sufficiently to allow him to say: 'What made you decide to become a princess?'
   After a thoughtful silence she said, 'It was decided for me, you know.'
   'Sorry, I—'
   'Being royal is a sort of family tradition. I expect it's the same with magic; no doubt your father was a wizard?'
   Cutwell gritted his teeth. 'Um. No,' he said, 'not really. Absolutely not, in fact.'
   He knew what she would say next, and here it came, reliable as the sunset, in a voice tinged with amusement and fascination.
   'Oh? Is it really true that wizards aren't allowed to—'
   'Well, if that's all I really should be going,' said Cutwell loudly. 'If anyone wants me, just follow the explosions. I–gnnnh!'
   Keli had stepped out of the dressing room.
   Now, women's clothes were not a subject that preoccupied Cutwell much– in fact, usually when he thought about women his mental pictures seldom included any clothes at all – but the vision in front of him really did take his breath away. Whoever had designed the dress didn't know when to stop. They'd put lace over the silk, and trimmed it with black vermine, and strung pearls anywhere that looked bare, and puffed and starched the sleeves and then added silver filigree and then started again with the silk.
   In fact it really was amazing what could be done with several ounces of heavy metal, some irritated molluscs, a few dead rodents and a lot of thread wound out of insects' bottoms. The dress wasn't so much worn as occupied; if the outlying flounces weren't supported on wheels, then Keli was stronger than he'd given her credit for.
   'What do you think?' she said, turning slowly. 'This was worn by my mother, and my grandmother, and her mother.'
   'What, all together?' said Cutwell, quite prepared to believe it. How can she get into it? he wondered. There must be a door round the back. . . .
   'It's a family heirloom. It's got real diamonds on the bodice.'
   'Which bit's the bodice?'
   'This bit.'
   Cutwell shuddered. 'It's very impressive,' he said, when he could trust himself to speak. 'You don't think it's perhaps a bit mature, though?'
   'It's queenly.'
   'Yes, but perhaps it won't allow you to move very fast?'
   'I have no intention of running. There must be dignity.' Once again the set of her jaw traced the line of her descent all the way to her conquering ancestor, who preferred to move very fast at all times and knew as much about dignity as could be carried on the point of a sharp spear.
   Cutwell spread his hands.
   'All right,' he said. 'Fine. We all do what we can. I just hope Mort has come up with some ideas.'
   'It's hard to have confidence in a ghost,' said Keli. 'He walks through walls!'
   'I've been thinking about that,' said Cutwell. 'It's a puzzle, isn't it? He walks through things only if he doesn't know he's doing it. I think it's an industrial disease.'
   'What?'
   'I was nearly sure last night. He's becoming real.'
   'But we're all real! At least, you are, and I suppose I am.'
   'But he's becoming more real. Extremely real. Nearly as real as Death, and you don't get much realler. Not much realler at all.'

   'Are you sure?' said Albert, suspiciously.
   'Of course,' said Ysabell. 'Work it out yourself if you like.'
   Albert looked back at the big book, his face a portrait of uncertainty.
   'Well, they could be about right,' he conceded with bad grace, and copied out the two names on a scrap of paper. There's one way to find out, anyway.'
   He pulled open the top drawer of Death's desk and extracted a big iron keyring. There was only one key on it.
   WHAT HAPPENS NOW? said Mort.
   'We've got to fetch the lifetimers,' said Albert. 'You have to come with me.'
   'Mort!' hissed Ysabell.
   'What?'
   'What you just said—' She lapsed into silence, and then added, 'Oh, nothing. It just sounded . . . odd.'
   'I only asked what happens now,' said Mort.
   'Yes, but– oh, never mind:'
   Albert brushed past them and sidled out into the hallway like a two-legged spider until he reached the door that was always kept locked. The key fitted perfectly. The door swung open. There wasn't so much as a squeak from its hinges, just a swish of deeper silence.
   And the roar of sand.
   Mort and Ysabell stood in the doorway, transfixed, as Albert stamped off between the aisles of glass. The sound didn't just enter the body via the ears, it came up through the legs and down through the skull and filled up the brain until all that it could think of was the rushing, hissing grey noise, the sound of millions of lives being lived. And rushing towards their inevitable destination.
   They stared up and out at the endless ranks of lifetimers, every one different, every one named. The light from torches ranged along the walls picked highlights off them, so that a star gleamed on every glass. The far walls of the room were lost in the galaxy of light.
   Mort felt Ysabell's fingers tighten on his arm.
   When she spoke, her voice was strained. 'Mort, some of them are sosmall.'
   I KNOW.
   Her grip relaxed, very gently, like someone putting the top ace on a house of cards and taking their hand away gingerly so as not to bring the whole edifice down.
   'Say that again?' she said quietly.
   'I said I know. There's nothing I can do about it. Haven't you been in here before?'
   'No.' She had withdrawn slightly, and was staring at his eyes.
   'It's no worse than the library,' said Mort, and almost believed it. But in the library you only read about it; in here you could see it happening.
   'Why are you looking at me like that?' he added.
   'I was just trying to remember what colour your eyes were,' she said, 'because—'
   'If you two have quite had enough of each other!' bellowed Albert above the roar of the sand. 'This way!'
   'Brown,' said Mort to Ysabell. 'They're brown. Why?'
   'Hurry up!'
   'You'd better go and help him,' said Ysabell. 'He seems to be getting quite upset.'
   Mort left her, his mind a sudden swamp of uneasiness, and stalked across the tiled floor to where Albert stood impatiently tapping a foot.
   'What do I have to do?' he said.
   'Just follow me.'
   The room opened out into a series of passages, each one lined with the hourglasses. Here and there the shelves were divided by stone pillars inscribed with angular markings. Albert glanced at them occasionally; mainly he strode through the maze of sand as though he knew every turn by heart.
   'Is there one glass for everyone, Albert?'
   'Yes.'
   'This place doesn't look big enough.'
   'Do you know anything about m-dimensional topography?'
   'Um. No.'
   Then I shouldn't aspire to hold any opinions, if I was you,' said Albert.
   He paused in front of a shelf of glasses, glanced at the paper again, ran his hand along the row and suddenly snatched up a glass. The top bulb was almost empty.
   'Hold this,' he said. 'If this is right, then the other should be somewhere near. Ah. Here.'
   Mort turned the two glasses around in his hands. One had all the markings of an important life, while the other one was squat and quite unremarkable.
   Mort read the names. The first seemed to refer to a nobleman in the Agatean Empire regions. The second was a collection of pictograms that he recognized as originating in Turnwise Klatch.
   'Over to you,' Albert sneered. The sooner you get started, the sooner you'll be finished. I'll bring Binky round to the front door.'
   'Do my eyes look all right to you?' said Mort, anxiously.
   'Nothing wrong with them that I can see,' said Albert. 'Bit red round the edges, bit bluer than usual, nothing special.'
   Mort followed him back past the long shelves of glass, looking thoughtful. Ysabell watched him take the sword from the rack by the door and test its edge by swishing it through the air, just as Death did, and grinning mirthlessly at the satisfactory sound of the thunderclap.
   She recognized the walk. He wasstalking.
   'Mort?' she whispered.
   YES?
   'Something's happening to you.'
   I KNOW, said Mort. 'But I think I can control it.'
   They heard the sound of hooves outside, and Albert pushed the door open and came in rubbing his hands.
   'Right, lad, no time to—'
   Mort swung the sword at arm's length. It scythed through the air with a noise like ripping silk and buried itself in the doorpost by Albert's ear.
   ON YOUR KNEES, ALBERTO MALICH.
   Albert's mouth dropped open. His eyes rolled sideways to the shimmering blade a few inches from his head, and then narrowed to tight little lines.
   'You surely wouldn't dare, boy,' he said.
   MORT. The syllable snapped out as fast as a whiplash and twice as vicious.
   There was a pact,' said Albert, but there was the barest gnat-song of doubt in his voice. 'There was an agreement.'
   'Not with me.'
   'There was an agreement! Where would we be if we could not honour an agreement?'
   'I don't know where I would be,' said Mort softly. BUT I KNOW WHERE YOU WOULD GO.
   That's not fair!' Now it was a whine.
   THERE'S NO JUSTICE. THERE'S JUST ME.
   'Stop it,' said Ysabell. 'Mort, you're being silly. You can't kill anyone here. Anyway, you don't really want to kill Albert.'
   'Not here. But I could send him back to the world.'
   Albert went pale.
   'You wouldn't!'
   'No? I can take you back and leave you there. I shouldn't think you've got much time left, have you?' HAVE YOU?
   'Don't talk like that,' said Albert, quite failing to meet his gaze. 'You sound like the master when you talk like that.'
   'I could be a lot worse than the master,' said Mort evenly. 'Ysabell, go and get Albert's book, will you?'
   'Mort, I really think you're—'
   SHALL I ASK YOU AGAIN?
   She fled from the room, white-faced.
   Albert squinted at Mort along the length of the sword, and smiled a lop-sided, humourless smile.
   'You won't be able to control it forever,' he said.
   'I don't want to. I just want to control it for long enough.'
   'You're receptive now, see? The longer the master is away, the more you'll become just like him. Only it'll be worse, because you'll remember all about being human and—'
   'What about you, then?' snapped Mort. 'What can you remember about being human? If you went back, how much life have you got left?'
   'Ninety-one days, three hours and five minutes,' said Albert promptly. 'I knew he was on my trail, see? But I'm safe here and he's not such a bad master. Sometimes I don't know what he'd do without me.'
   'Yes, no one dies in Death's own kingdom. And you're pleased with that?' said Mort.
   'I'm more than two thousand years old, I am. I've lived longer than anyone in the world.'
   Mort shook his head.
   'You haven't, you know,' he said. 'You've just stretched things out more. No one really lives here. The time in this place is just a sham. It's not real. Nothing changes. I'd rather die and see what happens next than spend eternity here.'
   Albert pinched his nose reflectively. 'Yes, well, you might,' he conceded, 'but I was a wizard, you know. I was pretty good at it. They put up a statue to me, you know. But you don't live a long life as a wizard without making a few enemies, see, ones who'll . . . wait on the Other Side.'
   He sniffed. They ain't all got two legs, either. Some of them ain't got legs at all. Or faces. Death don't frighten me. It's what comes after.'
   'Help me, then.'
   'What good will that do me?'
   'One day you might need some friends on the Other Side,' said Mort. He thought for a few seconds and added, 'If I were you, it wouldn't do any harm to give my soul a bit of a last-minute polish. Some of those waiting for you might not like the taste of that.'
   Albert shuddered and shut his eyes.
   'You don't know about that what you talk about,' he added, with more feeling than grammar, 'else you wouldn't say that. What do you want from me?'
   Mort told him.
   Albert cackled.
   'Just that? Just change Reality? You can't. There isn't any magic strong enough any more. The Great Spells could of done it. Nothing else. And that's it, so you might as well do as you please and the best of luck to you.'
   Ysabell came back, a little out of breath, clutching the latest volume of Albert's life. Albert sniffed again. The tiny drip on the end of his nose fascinated Mort. It was always on the point of dropping off but never had the courage. Just like him, he thought.
   'You can't do anything to me with the book,' said the old wizard warily.
   'I don't intend to. But it strikes me that you don't get to be a powerful wizard by telling the truth all the time. Ysabell, read out what's being written.'
   ' "Albert looked at him uncertainly",' Ysabell read.
   'You can't believe everything writ down there—'
   '— "he burst out, knowing in the flinty pit of his heart that Mort certainly could",' Ysabell read.
   'Stop it!'
   ' "he shouted, trying to put at the back of his mind the knowledge that even if Reality could not be stopped it might be possible to slow it down a little".'
   HOW?
   ' "intoned Mort in the leaden tones of Death",' began Ysabell dutifully.
   'Yes, yes, all right, you needn't bother with my bit,' snapped Mort irritably.
   'Pardon me for living, I'm sure.'
   NO ONE GETS PARDONED FOR LIVING.
   'And don't talk like that to me, thank you. It doesn't frighten me,' she said. She glanced down at the book, where the moving line of writing was calling her a liar.
   Tell me how, wizard,' said Mort.
   'My magic's all I've got left!' wailed Albert.
   'You don't need it, you old miser.'
   'You don't frighten me, boy—'
   LOOK INTO MY FACE AND TELL ME THAT.
   Mort snapped his fingers imperiously. Ysabell bent her head over the book again.
   ' "Albert looked into the blue glow of those eyes and the last of his defiance drained away",' she read, ' "for he saw not just Death but Death with all the human seasonings of vengeance and cruelty and distaste, and with a terrible certainty he knew that this was the last chance and Mort would send him back into Time and hunt him down and take him and deliver him bodily into the dark Dungeon Dimensions where creatures of horror would dot dot dot dot dot",' she finished. 'It's just dots for half a page.'
   That's because the book daren't even mention them,' whispered Albert. He tried to shut his eyes but the pictures in the darkness behind his eyelids were so vivid that he opened them again. Even Mort was better than that.
   'All right,' he said. There is one spell. It slows down time over a little area. I'll write it down, but you'll have to find a wizard to say it.'
   'I can do that.'
   Albert ran a tongue like an old loafah over his dry lips.
   There is a price, though,' he added. 'You must complete the Duty first.'
   'Ysabell?' said Mort. She looked at the page in front of her.
   'He means it,' she said. 'If you don't then everything will go wrong and he'll drop back into Time anyway.'
   All three of them turned to look at the great clock that dominated the hallway. Its pendulum blade sawed slowly through the air, cutting time into little pieces.
   Mort groaned.
   'There isn't enough time!' he groaned. 'I can't do both of them in time!'
   'The master would have found time,' observed Albert.
   Mort wrenched the blade from the doorway and shook it furiously but ineffectually towards Albert, who flinched.
   'Write down the spell, then,' he shouted. 'And do it fast!'
   He turned on his heel and stalked back into Death's study. There was a large disc of the world in one corner, complete down to solid silver elephants standing on the back of a Great A'Tuin cast in bronze and more than a metre long. The great rivers were represented by veins of jade, the deserts by powdered diamond and the most notable cities were picked out in precious stones; Ankh-Morpork, for instance, was a carbuncle.
   He plonked the two glasses down at the approximate locations of their owners and flopped down in Death's chair, glaring at them, willing them to be closer together. The chair squeaked gently as he swivelled from side to side, glowering at the little disc.
   After a while Ysabell came in, treading softly.
   'Albert's written it down,' she said quietly, 'I've checked the book. It isn't a trick. He's gone and locked himself in his room now and—'
   'Look at these two! I mean, will you look at them!'
   'I think you should calm down a bit, Mort.'
   'How can I calm down with, look, this one over here almost in the Great Nef, andthis one right in Bes Pelargic and then I've got to get back to Sto Lat. That's a ten thousand mile round trip however you look at it. It can't be done.'
   'I'm sure you'll find a way. And I'll help.'
   He looked at her for the first time and saw she was wearing her outdoor coat, the unsuitable one with the big fur collar.
   'You? What could you do?'
   'Binky can easily carry two,' said Ysabell meekly. She waved a paper package vaguely. 'I've packed us something to eat. I could– hold open doors and things.'
   Mort laughed mirthlessly. THAT WON'T BE NECESSARY.
   'I wish you'd stop talking like that.'
   'I can't take passengers. You'll slow me down.'
   Ysabell sighed. 'Look, how about this? Let's pretend we've had the row and I've won. See? It saves a lot of effort. I actually think you might find Binky rather reluctant to go if I'm not there. I've fed him an awful lot of sugar lumps over the years. Now– are we going?'
   Albert sat on his narrow bed, glowering at the wall. He heard the sound of hoofbeats, abruptly cut off as Binky got airborne, and muttered under his breath.
   Twenty minutes passed. Expressions flitted across the old wizard's face like cloud shadows across a hillside. Occasionally he'd whisper something to himself, like 'I told 'em' or 'Never would of stood for it' or 'The master ought to be tole'.
   Eventually he seemed to reach an agreement with himself, knelt down gingerly and pulled a battered trunk from under his bed. He opened it with difficulty and unfolded a dusty grey robe that scattered mothballs and tarnished sequins across the floor. He pulled it on, brushed off the worst of the dust, and crawled under the bed again. There was a lot of muffled cursing and the occasional clink of china and finally Albert emerged holding a staff taller than he was.
   It was thicker than any normal staff, mainly because of the carvings that covered it from top to bottom. They were actually quite indistinct, but gave the impression that if you could see them better you would regret it.
   Albert brushed himself down again and examined himself critically in the washstand mirror.
   Then he said, 'Hat. No hat. Got to have a hat for the wizarding. Damn.'
   He stamped out of the room and returned after a busy fifteen minutes which included a circular hole cut out of the carpet in Mort's bedroom, the silver paper taken out from behind the mirror in Ysabell's room, a needle and thread from the box under the sink in the kitchen and a few loose sequins scraped up from the bottom of the robe chest. The end result was not as good as he would have liked and tended to slip rakishly over one eye, but it was black and had stars and moons on it and proclaimed its owner to be, without any doubt, a wizard, although possibly a desperate one.
   He felt properly dressed for the first time in two thousand years. It was a disconcerting feeling and caused him a second's reflection before he kicked aside the rag rug beside the bed and used the staff to draw a circle on the floor.
   When the tip of the staff passed it left a line of glowing octarine, the eighth colour of the spectrum, the colour of magic, the pigment of the imagination.
   He marked eight points on its circumference and joined them up to form an octogram. A low throbbing began to fill the room.
   Alberto Malich stepped into the centre and held the staff above his head. He felt it wake to his grip, felt the tingle of the sleeping power unfold itself slowly and deliberately, like a waking tiger. It triggered old memories of power and magic that buzzed through the cobwebbed attics of his mind. He felt alive for the first time in centuries.
   He licked his lips. The throbbing had died away, leaving a strange, waiting kind of silence.
   Malich raised his head and shouted one single syllable.
   Blue-green fire flashed from both ends of the staff. Streams of octarine flame spouted from the eight pouits of the octogram and enveloped the wizard. All this wasn't actually necessary to accomplish the spell, but wizards consider appearances are very
   important. . . .
   So are disappearances. He vanished.

   Stratohemispheric winds whipped at Mort's cloak.
   'Where are we going first?' yelled Ysabell in his ear.
   'Bes Pelargic!' shouted Mort, the gale whirling his words away.
   'Where's that?'
   'Agatean Empire! Counterweight Continent!'
   He pointed downward.
   He wasn't forcing Binky at the moment, knowing the miles that lay ahead, and the big white horse was currently running at an easy gallop out over the ocean. Ysabell looked down at roaring green waves topped with white foam, and clung tighter to Mort.
   Mort peered ahead at the cloudbank that marked the distant continent and resisted the urge to hurry Binky along with the flat of his sword. He'd never struck the horse and wasn't at all confident about what would happen if he did. All he could do was wait.
   A hand appeared under his arm, holding a sandwich.
   'There's ham or cheese and chutney,' she said. 'You might as well eat, there's nothing else to do.'
   Mort looked down at the soggy triangle and tried to remember when he last had a meal. Some time beyond the reach of a clock, anyway– he'd need a calendar to calculate it. He took the sandwich.
   'Thanks,' he said, as graciously as he could manage.
   The tiny sun rolled down towards the horizon, towing its lazy daylight behind it. The clouds ahead grew, and became outlined in pink and orange. After a while he could make out the darker blur of land below them, with here and there the lights of a city.
   Half an hour later he was sure he could see individual buildings. Agatean architecture inclined towards squat pyramids.
   Binky lost height until his hooves were barely a few feet above the sea. Mort examined the hourglass again, and gently tugged on the reins to direct the horse towards a seaport a little Rimwards of their present course.
   There were a few ships at anchor, mostly single-sailed coastal traders. The Empire didn't encourage its subjects to go far away, in case they saw things that might disturb them. For the same reason it had built a wall around the entire country, patrolled by the Heavenly Guard whose main function was to tread heavily on the fingers of any inhabitants who felt they might like to step outside for five minutes for a breath of fresh air.
   This didn't happen often, because most of the subjects of the Sun Emperor were quite happy to live inside the Wall. It's a fact of life that everyone is on one side or other of a wall, so the only thing to do is forget about it or evolve stronger fingers.
   'Who runs this place?' said Ysabell, as they passed over the harbour.
   'There's some kind of boy emperor,' said Mort. 'But the top man is really the Grand Vizier, I think.'
   'Never trust a Grand Vizier,' said Ysabell wisely.
   In fact the Sun Emperor didn't. The Vizier, whose name was Nine Turning Mirrors, had some very clear views about who should run the country, e.g., that it should be him, and now the boy was getting big enough to ask questions like 'Don't you think the wall would look better with a few gates in it?' and 'Yes, but what is it like on the other side?' he had decided that in the Emperor's own best interests he should be painfully poisoned and buried in quicklime.
   Binky landed on the raked gravel outside the low, many-roomed palace, severely rearranging the harmony of the universe.[8] Mort slid off his back and helped Ysabell down.
   'Just don't get in the way, will you?' he said urgently. 'And don't ask questions either.'
   He ran up some lacquered steps and hurried through the silent rooms, pausing occasionally to take his bearings from the hourglass. At last he sidled down a corridor and peered through an ornate lattice into a long low room where the Court was at its evening meal.
   The young Sun Emperor was sitting crosslegged at the head of the mat with his cloak of vermine and feathers spread out behind him. He looked as though he was outgrowing it. The rest of the Court was sitting around the mat in strict and complicated order of precedence, but there was no mistaking the Vizier, who was tucking into his bowl ofsquishi and boiled seaweed in a highly suspicious fashion. No-one seemed to be about to die.
   Mort padded along the passage, turned the corner and nearly walked into several large members of the Heavenly Guard, who were clustered around a spyhole in the paper wall and passing a cigarette from hand to hand in that palm-cupped way of soldiers on duty.
   He tiptoed back to the lattice and overheard the conversation thus:
   'I am the most unfortunate of mortals, O Immanent Presence, to find such as this in my otherwise satisfactorysquishi,' said the Vizier, extending his chopsticks.
   The Court craned to see. So did Mort. Mort couldn't help agreeing with the statement, though– the thing was a sort of blue-green lump with rubbery tubes dangling from it.
   The preparer of food will be disciplined, Noble Personage of Scholarship,' said the Emperor. 'Who got the spare ribs?'
   'No, O Perceptive Father of Your People, I was rather referring to the fact that this is, I believe, the bladder and spleen of the deepwater puff eel, allegedly the most tasty of morsels to the extent that it may be eaten only by those beloved of the gods themselves or so it is written, among such company of course I do not include my miserable self.'
   With a deft flick he transported it to the bowl of the Emperor, where it wobbled to a standstill. The boy looked at it for some time, and then skewered it on a chopstick.
   'Ah,' he said, 'but is it not also written by none other than the great philosopher Ly Tin Wheedle that a scholar may be ranked above princes? I seem to remember you giving me the passage to read once, O Faithful and Assiduous Seeker of Knowledge.'
   The thing followed another brief arc through the air and flopped apologetically into the Vizier's bowl. He scooped it up in a quick movement and poised it for a second service. His eyes narrowed.
   'Such may be generally the case, O Jade River of Wisdom, but specifically I cannot be ranked above the Emperor whom I love as my own son and have done ever since his late father's unfortunate death, and thus I lay this small offering at your feet.'
   The eyes of the court followed the wretched organ on its third flight across the mat, but the Emperor snatched up his fan and brought off a magnificent volley that ended back in the Vizier's bowl with such force that it sent up a spray of seaweed.
   'Somebody eat it, for heaven's sake,' shouted Mort, totally unheard. 'I'm in a hurry!'
   'Thou art indeed the most thoughtful of servants, 0 Devoted and Indeed Only Companion of My Late Father and Grandfather When They Passed Over, and therefore I decree that your reward shall be this most rare and exquisite of morsels.'
   The Vizier prodded the thing uncertainly, and looked into the Emperor's smile. It was bright and terrible. He fumbled for an excuse.
   'Alas, it would seem that I have already eaten far too much—' he began, but the Emperor waved him into silence.
   'Doubtless it requires a suitable seasoning,' he said, and clapped his hands. The wall behind him ripped from top to bottom and four Heavenly Guards stepped through, three of them brandishingcando swords and the fourth trying hurriedly to swallow a lighted dog-end.
   The Vizier's bowl dropped from his hands.
   'My most faithful of servants believes he has no space left for this final mouthful,' said the Emperor. 'Doubtless you can investigate his stomach to see if this is true. Why has that man got smoke coming out of his ears?'
   'Anxious for action, O Sky Eminence,' said the sergeant quickly. 'No stopping him, I'm afraid.'
   Then let him take his knife and– oh, the Vizier seems to be hungry after all. Well done.'
   There was absolute silence while the Vizier's cheeks bulged rhythmically. Then he gulped.
   'Delicious,' he said. 'Superb. Truly the food of the gods, and now, if you will excuse me—' He unfolded his legs and made as if to stand up. Little beads of sweat had appeared on his forehead.
   'You wish to depart?' said the Emperor, raising his eyebrows.
   'Pressing matters of state, O Perspicacious Personage of—'
   'Be seated. Rising so soon after meals can be bad for the digestion,' said the Emperor, and the guards nodded agreement. 'Besides, there are no urgent matters of state unless you refer to those in the small red bottle marked "Antidote" in the black lacquered cabinet on the bamboo rug in your quarters, O Lamp of Midnight Oil.'
   There was a ringing in the Vizier's ears. His face began to go blue.
   'You see?' said the Emperor. 'Untimely activity on a heavy stomach is conducive to ill humours. May this message go swiftly to all corners of my country, that all men may know of your unfortunate condition and derive instruction thereby.'
   'I . . . must . . . congratulate your . . . Personage on such . . . consideration,' said the Vizier, and fell forward into a dish of boiled soft-shelled crabs.
   'I had anexcellent teacher,' said the Emperor.
   ABOUT TIME, TOO, said Mort, and swung the sword.
   A moment later the soul of the Vizier got up from the mat and looked Mort up and down.
   'Who are you, barbarian?' he snapped.
   DEATH.
   'Not my Death,'said the Vizier firmly. 'Where's the Black Celestial Dragon of Fire?'
   HE COULDN'T COME, said Mort. There were shadows forming in the air behind the Vizier's soul. Several of them wore emperor's robes, but there were plenty of others jostling them, and they all looked most anxious to welcome the newcomer to the lands of the dead.
   'I think there's some people here to see you,' said Mort, and hurried away. As he reached the passageway the Vizier's soul started to scream. . . .
   Ysabell was standing patiently by Binky, who was making a late lunch of a five-hundred-year-old bonsai tree.
   'One down,' said Mort, climbing into the saddle. 'Come on. I've got a bad feeling about the next one, and we haven't much time.'

   Albert materialised in the centre of Unseen University, in the same place, in fact, from which he had departed the world some two thousand years before.
   He grunted with satisfaction and brushed a few specks of dust off his robe.
   He became aware that he was being watched; on looking up, he discovered that he had flashed into existence under the stern marble gaze of himself.
   He adjusted his spectacles and peered disapprovingly at the bronze plaque screwed to his pedestal. It said:
   'Alberto Malich, Founder of This University. AM 1,222-1,289. "We Will Not See His Like Again".'
   So much for prediction, he thought. And if they thought so much of him they could at least have hired a decent sculptor. It was disgraceful. The nose was all wrong. Call that a leg? People had been carving their names on it, too. He wouldn't be seen dead in a hat like that, either. Of course, if he could help it, he wouldn't be seen dead at all.
   Albert aimed an octarine thunderbolt at the ghastly thing and grinned evilly as it exploded into dust.
   'Right,' he said to the Disc at large, 'I'm back.' The tingle from the magic coursed all the way up his arm and started a warm glow in his mind. How he'd missed it, all these years.
   Wizards came hurrying through the big double doors at the sound of the explosion and cleared the wrong conclusion from a standing start.
   There was the pedestal, empty. There was a cloud of marble dust over everything. And striding out of it, muttering to himself, was Albert.
   The wizards at the back of the crowd started to have it away as quickly and quietly as possible. There wasn't one of them that hadn't, at some time in his jolly youth, put a common bedroom utensil on old Albert's head or carved his name somewhere on the statue's chilly anatomy, or spilled beer on the pedestal. Worse than that, too, during Rag Week when the drink flowed quickly and the privy seemed too far to stagger. These had all seemed hilarious ideas at the time. They suddenly didn't, now.
   Only two figures remained to face the statue's wrath, one because he had got his robe caught in the door and the other because he was, in fact, an ape and could therefore take a relaxed attitude to human affairs.
   Albert grabbed the wizard, who was trying desperately to walk into the wall. The man squealed.
   'All right, all right, I admit it! I was drunk at the time, believe me, didn't mean it, gosh, I'm sorry, I'm so sorry—'
   'What are you bleating about, man?' said Albert, genuinely puzzled.
   '— so sorry, if I tried to tell you how sorry I am we'd —'
   'Stop this bloody nonsense!' Albert glanced down at the little ape, who gave him a warm friendly smile. 'What's your name, man?'
   'Yes, sir, I'll stop, sir, right away, no more nonsense, sir . . . Rincewind, sir. Assistant librarian, if it's all right by you.'
   Albert looked him up and down. The man had a desperate scuffed look, like something left out for the laundry. He decided that if this was what wizarding had come to, someone ought to do something about it.
   'What sort of librarian would have you for assistant?' he demanded irritably.
   'Oook.'
   Something like a warm soft leather glove tried to hold his hand.
   'A monkey! In my university!'
   'Orang-outang, sir. He used to be a wizard but got caught in some magic, sir, now he won't let us turn him back, and he's the only one who knows where all the books are,' said Rincewind urgently. 'I look after his bananas,' he added, feeling some additional explanation was called for.
   Albert glared at him. 'Shut up.'
   'Shutting up right away, sir.'
   'And tell me where Death is.'
   'Death, sir?' said Rincewind, backing against the wall.
   Tall, skeletal, blue eyes, stalks, TALKS LIKE THIS . . . Death. Seen him lately?'
   Rincewind swallowed. 'Not lately, sir.'
   'Well, I want him. This nonsense has got to stop. I'm going to stop itnow, see? I want the eight most senior wizards assembledhere, right, in half an hour with all the necessary equipment to perform the Rite of AshkEnte, is that understood? Not that the sight of you lot gives me any confidence. Bunch of pantywaisters the lot of you, and stop trying to hold my hand!'
   'Oook.'
   'And now I'm going to the pub,' snapped Albert. 'Do they sell any halfway decent cat's piss anywhere these days?'
   There's the Drum, sir,' said Rincewind.
   'The Broken Drum? In Filigree Street? Still there?'
   'Well, they change the name sometimes and rebuild it completely but the site has been, er, on the site for years. I expect you're pretty dry, eh, sir?' Rincewind said, with an air of ghastly camaraderie.
   'What would you know about it?' said Albert sharply.
   'Absolutely nothing, sir,' said Rincewind promptly.
   'I'm going to the Drum, then. Half an hour, mind. And if they're not waiting for me when I come back, then well, they'd just better be!'
   He stormed out of the hall in a cloud of marble dust.
   Rincewind watched him go. The librarian held his hand.
   'You know the worst of it?' said Rincewind.
   'Oook?'
   'I don't evenremember walking under a mirror.'

   At about the time Albert was in The Mended Drum arguing with the landlord over a yellowing bar tab that had been handed down carefully from father to son through one regicide, three civil wars, sixty-one major fires, four hundred and ninety robberies and more than fifteen thousand barroom brawls to record the fact that Alberto Malich still owed the management three copper pieces plus interest currently standing at the contents of most of the Disc's larger strongrooms, which proved once again that an Ankhian merchant with an unpaid bill has the kind of memory that would make an elephant blink . . . at about this time, Binky was leaving a vapour trail in skies above the great mysterious continent of Klatch.
   Far below drums sounded in the scented, shadowy jungles and columns of curling mist rose from hidden rivers where nameless beasts lurked under the surface and waited for supper to walk past.
   'There's no more cheese, you'll have to have the ham,' said Ysabell. 'What's that light over there?'
   The Light Dams,' said Mort. 'We're getting closer.' He pulled the hourglass out of his pocket and checked the level of the sand.
   'But not close enough, dammit!'
   The Light Dams lay like pools of light hubwards of their course, which is exactly what they were; some of the tribes constructed mirror walls in the desert mountains to collect the Disc sunlight, which is slow and slightly heavy. It was used as currency.
   Binky glided over the campfires of the nomads and the silent marshes of the Tsort river. Ahead of them dark, familiar shapes began to reveal themselves in the moonlight.
   The Pyramids of Tsort by moonlight!' breathed Ysabell, 'How romantic!'
   MORTARED WITH THE BLOOD OF THOUSANDS OF SLAVES, observed Mort.
   'Please don't.'
   'I'm sorry, but the practical fact of the matter is that these—'
   'All right, all right, you've made your point,' said Ysabell irritably.
   'It's a lot of effort to go to to bury a dead king,' said Mort, as they circled above one of the smaller pyramids. They fill them full of preservative, you know, so they'll survive into the next world.'
   'Does it work?'
   'Not noticeably.' Mort leaned over Binky's neck. 'Torches down there,' he said. 'Hang on.'
   A procession was winding away from the avenue of pyramids, led by a giant statue of Offler the Crocodile God borne by a hundred sweating slaves. Binky cantered above it, entirely unnoticed, and performed a perfect four-point landing on the hard-packed sand outside the pyramid's entrance.
   'They've pickled another king,' said Mort. He examined the glass again in the moonlight. It was quite plain, not the sort normally associated with royalty.
   That can't be him,' said Ysabell. They don't pickle them when they're still alive, do they?'
   'I hope not, because I read where, before they do the preserving, they, um, cut them open and remove—'
   'I don't want to hear it—'
   '— all the soft bits,' Mort concluded lamely. 'It's just as well the pickling doesn't work, really, just imagine having to walk around with no —'
   'So it isn't the king you've come to take,' said Ysabell loudly. 'Who is it, then?'
   Mort turned towards the dark entrance. It wouldn't be sealed until dawn, to give time for the dead king's soul to leave. It looked deep and foreboding, hinting at purposes considerably more dire than, say, keeping a razor blade nice and sharp.
   'Let's find out,' he said.
   'Look out! He's coming back!'
   The University's eight most senior wizards shuffled into line, tried to smooth out their beards and in general made an unsuccessful effort to look presentable. It wasn't easy. They had been snatched from their workrooms, or a postprandial brandy in front of a roaring fire, or quiet contemplation under a handkerchief in a comfy chair somewhere, and all of them were feeling extremely apprehensive and rather bewildered. They kept glancing at the empty pedestal.
   Only one creature could have duplicated the expressions on their faces, and that would be a pigeon who has heard not only that Lord Nelson has got down off his column but has also been seen buying a 12-bore repeater and a box of cartridges.
   'He's coming up the corridor!' shouted Rincewind, and dived behind a pillar.
   The assembled mages watched the big double doors as if they were about to explode, which shows how prescient they were, because they exploded. Matchstick-sized bits of oak rained down among them and a small thin figure stood outlined against the light. It held a smoking staff in one hand. The other held a small yellow toad.
   'Rincewind!' bawled Albert.
   'Sir!'
   'Take this thing away and dispose of it.'
   The toad crawled into Rincewind's hand and gave him an apologetic look.
   That's the last time that bloody landlord gives any lip to a wizard,' said Albert with smug satisfaction. 'It seems I turn my back for a few hundred years and suddenly people in this town are encouraged to think they can talk back to wizards, eh?'
   One of the senior wizards mumbled something.
   'What was that? Speak up, that man!'
   'As the bursar of this university I must say that we've always encouraged a good neighbour policy with respect to the community,' mumbled the wizard, trying to avoid Albert's gimlet stare. He had an upturned chamber pot on his conscience, with three cases of obscene graffiti to be taken into consideration.
   Albert let his mouth drop open. 'Why?' he said.
   'Well, er, a sense of civic duty, we feel it's vitally important that we show an examp— arrgh!'
   The wizard tried desperately to beat out the flames in his beard. Albert lowered his staff and looked slowly along the row of mages. They swayed away from his stare like grass in a gale.
   'Anyone else want to show a sense of civic duty?' he said. 'Good neighbours, anybody?' He drew himself up to his full height. 'You spineless maggots! I didn't found this University so you could lend people the bloody lawnmower! What's the use of having the power if you don't wield it? Man doesn't show you respect, you don't leave enough of his damn inn to roast chestnuts on, understand?'
   Something like a soft sigh went up from the assembled wizards. They stared sadly at the toad in Rincewind's hand. Most of them, in the days of their youth, had mastered the art of getting rascally drunk at the Drum. Of course, all that was behind them now, but the Guild of Merchants' annual knife-and-fork supper would have been held in the Drum's upstairs room the following evening, and all the Eighth Level wizards had been sent complimentary tickets; there would have been roast swan and two kinds of trifle and lots of fraternal toasts to 'Our esteemed, nay, distinguished guests' until it was time for the college porters to turn up with the wheelbarrows.
   Albert strutted along the row, poking the occasional paunch with his staff. His mind danced and sang. Go back? Never! This was power, this was living; he'd challenge old boniface and spit in his empty eye.
   'By the Smoking Mirror of Grism, there's going to be a few changes around here!'
   Those wizards who had studied history nodded uncomfortably. It would be back to the stone floors and getting up when it was still dark and no alcohol under any circumstances and memorising the true names of everything until the brain squeaked.
   'What's that man doing!'
   A wizard who had absent-mindedly reached for his tobacco pouch let the half-formed cigarette fall from his trembling fingers. It bounced when it hit the floor and all the wizards watched it roll with longing eyes until Albert stepped forward smartly and squashed it.
   Albert spun round. Rincewind, who had been following him as a sort of unofficial adjutant, nearly walked into him.
   'You! Rincething! D'yer smoke?'
   'No, sir! Filthy habit!' Rincewind avoided the gaze of his superiors. He was suddenly aware that he had made some lifelong enemies, and it was no consolation to know that he probably wouldn't have them for very long.
   'Right! Hold my staff. Now, you bunch of miserable back-sliders, this is going to stop, d'yer hear? First thing tomorrow, up at dawn, three times round the quadrangle and back here for physical jerks! Balanced meals! Study! Healthy exercise! And that bloody monkey goes to a circus, first thing!'
   'Oook?'
   Several of the older wizards shut their eyes.
   'But first,' said Albert, lowering his voice, 'you'll oblige me by setting up the Rite of AshkEnte.'
   'I have some unfinished business,' he added.

   Mort strode through the cat-black corridors of the pyramid, with Ysabell hurrying along behind him. The faint glow from his sword illuminated unpleasant things; Offler the Crocodile God was a cosmetics advert compared to some of the things the people of Tsort worshipped. In alcoves along the way were statues of creatures apparently built of all the bits God had left over.
   'What are they here for?' whispered Ysabell.
   'The Tsortean priests say they come alive when the pyramid is sealed and prowl the corridors to protect the body of the king from tomb robbers,' said Mort.
   'What a horrible superstition.'
   'Who said anything about superstition?' said Mort absently.
   'They really come alive?'
   'All I'll say is that when the Tsorteans put a curse on a place, they don't mess about.'
   Mort turned a corner and Ysabell lost sight of him for a heart-stopping moment. She scurried through the darkness and cannoned into him. He was examining a dog-headed bird.
   'Urgh,' she said. 'Doesn't it send shivers up your spine?'
   'No,' said Mort flatly.
   'Why not?'
   BECAUSE I AM MORT. He turned, and she saw his eyes glow like blue pinpoints.
   'Stop it!'
   I– CAN'T.
   She tried to laugh. It didn't work. 'You're not Death,' she said. 'You're only doing his job.'
   'DEATH IS WHOEVER DOES DEATH'S JOB.
   The shocked pause that followed this was broken by a groan from further along the dark passage. Mort turned on his heel and hurried towards it.
   He's right, thought Ysabell. Even the way he moves. . . .
   But the fear of the darkness that the light was dragging towards her overcame any other doubts and she crept after him, around another corner and into what appeared, in the fitful glow from the sword, to be a cross between a treasury and a very cluttered attic.
   'What's this place?' she whispered. 'I've never seen so much stuff!'
   THE KING TAKES IT WITH HIM INTO THE NEXT WORLD, said Mort.
   'He certainly doesn't believe in traveling light. Look, there's a whole boat. And a gold bathtub!'
   DOUBTLESS HE WILL WISH TO KEEP CLEAN WHEN HE GETS THERE.
   'And all those statues!'
   THOSE STATUES, I'M SORRY TO SAY, WERE PEOPLE. SERVANTS FOR THE KING, YOU UNDERSTAND.
   Ysabell's face set grimly.
   THE PRIESTS GIVE THEM POISON.
   There was another groan, from the other side of the cluttered room. Mort followed it to its source, stepping awkwardly over rolls of carpet, bunches of dates, crates of crockery and piles of gems. The long obviously hadn't been able to decide what he was going to leave behind on his journey, so had decided to play safe and take everything.
   ONLY IT DOESNT ALWAYS WORK QUICKLY, Mort added sombrely.
   Ysabell clambered gamely after him, and peered over a canoe at a young girl sprawled across a pile of rugs. She was wearing gauze trousers, a waistcoat cut from not enough material, and enough bangles to moor a decent-sized ship. There was a green stain around her mouth.
   'Does it hurt?' said Ysabell quietly.
   No. THEY THINK IT TAKES THEM TO PARADISE.
   'Does it?'
   MAYBE. WHO KNOWS? Mort took the hourglass out of an inner pocket and inspected it by the gleam of the sword. He seemed to be counting to himself, and then with a sudden movement tossed the glass over his shoulder and brought the sword down with his other hand.
   The girl's shade sat up and stretched, with a clink of ghostly jewellery. She caught sight of Mort, and bowed her head.
   'My lord!'
   NO ONE'S LORD, said Mort. NOW RUN ALONG TO WHEREVER YOU BELIEVE YOU'RE GOING.
   'I shall be a concubine at the heavenly court of King Zetesphut, who will dwell among the stars forever,' she said firmly.
   'You don't have to be,' said Ysabell sharply. The girl turned to her, wide-eyed.
   'Oh, but I must. I've been training for it,' she said, as she faded from view. 'I've only managed to be a handmaiden up till now.'
   She vanished. Ysabell stared with dark disapproval at the space she had occupied.
   'Well!' she said, and, 'Did you see what she had on?'
   LET'S GET OUT OF HERE.
   'But it can't be true about King Whosis dwelling among the stars,' she grumbled as they found their way out of the crowded room. 'There's nothing but empty space up there.'
   IT'S HARD TO EXPLAIN, said Mort. HE'LL DWELL AMONG THE STARS IN HIS OWN MIND.
   'With slaves?'
   IF THAT'S WHAT THEY THINK THEY ARE.
   That's not very fair.'
   THERE'S NO JUSTICE, said Mort. JUST US.
   They hurried back along the avenues of waiting ghouls and were nearly running when they burst out into the desert night air. Ysabell leaned against the rough stonework and panted for breath.
   Mort wasn't out of breath.
   He wasn't breathing.
   I WILL TAKE YOU WHEREVER YOU WANT, he said, AND THEN I MUST LEAVE YOU.
   'But I thought you wanted to rescue the princess!'
   Mort shook his head.
   I HAVE NO CHOICE. THERE ARE NO CHOICES.
   She ran forward and grabbed his arm as he turned towards the waiting Binky. He removed her hand gently.
   I HAVE FINISHED MY APPRENTICESHIP.
   'It's all in your own mind!' yelled Ysabell. 'You're whatever you think you are!'
   She stopped and looked down. The sand around Mort's feet was beginning to whip up in little spurts and twirling dust devils.
   There was a crackle in the air, and a greasy feel. Mort looked uneasy.
   SOMEONE IS PERFORMING THE RITE OF ASH—
   It hit like a hammer, a force from out of the sky that blew the sand into a crater. There was a low buzzing and the smell of hot tin.
   Mort looked around himself in the gale of rushing sand, turning as if in a dream, alone in the calm centre of the gale. Lightning flashed in the whirling cloud. Deep inside his own mind he struggled to break free, but something had him in its grip and he could no more resist than a compass needle can ignore the compulsion to point towards the Hub.
   At last he found what he was searching for. It was a doorway edged in octarine light, leading to a short tunnel. There were figures at the other end, beckoning to him.
   I COME, he said, and then turned as he heard the sudden noise behind him. Eleven stone of young womanhood hit him squarely in the chest, lifting him off the ground.
   Mort landed with Ysabell kneeling on him, holding on grimly to his arms.
   LET ME GO, he intoned. I HAVE BEEN SUMMONED.
   'Not you, idiot!'
   She stared into the blue, pupil-less pools of his eyes. It was like looking down a rushing tunnel.
   Mort arched his back and screamed a curse so ancient and virulent that in the strong magical field it actually took on a form, flapped its leathery wings and slunk away. A private thunderstorm crashed around the sand dunes.
   His eyes drew her again. She looked away before she dropped like a stone down a well made of blue light.
   I COMMAND YOU. Mort's voice could have cut holes in rock.
   'Father tried that tone on me for years,' she said calmly. 'Generally when he wanted me to clean my bedroom. It didn't work then, either.'
   Mort screamed another curse, which flopped out of the air and tried to bury itself in the sand.
   THE PAIN—
   'It's all in your head,' she said, bracing herself against the force that wanted to drag them towards that flickering doorway. 'You're not Death. You're just Mort. You're whatever I think you are.'
   In the centre of the blurred blueness of his eyes were two tiny brown dots, rising at the speed of sight.
   The storm around them rose and wailed. Mort screamed.
   The Rite of AshkEnte, quite simply, summons and binds Death. Students of the occult will be aware that it can be performed with a simple incantation, three small bits of wood and 4cc of mouse blood, but no wizard worth his pointy hat would dream of doing anything so unimpressive; they knew in their hearts that if a spell didn't involve big yellow candles, lots of rare incense, circles drawn on the floor with eight different colours of chalk and a few cauldrons around the place then it simply wasn't worth contemplating.
   The eight wizards at their stations on the points of the great ceremonial octogram swayed and chanted, their arms held out sideways so they were just touching the fingertips of the mages on either side.
   But something was going wrong. True, a mist had formed in the very centre of the living octogram, but it was writhing and turning in on itself, refusing to focus.
   'More power!' shouted Albert. 'Give it more power!'
   A figure appeared momentarily in the smoke, black-robed and holding a glittering sword. Albert swore as he caught a glimpse of the pale face under the cowl; it wasn't pale enough.
   'No!' Albert yelled, ducking into the octogram and flailing at the flickering shape with his hands. 'Not you, not you. . . .'
   And, in faraway Tsort, Ysabell forgot she was a lady, bunched her fist, narrowed her eyes and caught Mort squarely on the jaw. The world around her exploded. . . .
   In the kitchen of Harga's House of Ribs the frying pan crashed to the floor, sending the cats scurrying out of the door. . . .
   In the great hall of the Unseen University everything happened at once.[9]
   The tremendous force the wizards had been exerting on the shadow realm suddenly had one focus. Like a reluctant cork from a bottle, like a dollop of fiery ketchup from the upturned sauce bottle of Infinity, Death landed in the octogram and swore.
   Albert realized just too late that he was inside the charmed ring and made a dive for the edge. But skeletal fingers caught him by the hem of his robe.
   The wizards, such of them who were still on their feet and conscious, were rather surprised to see that Death was wearing an apron and holding a small kitten.
   'WHY DID YOU HAVE TO SPOIL IT ALL?
   'Spoil it all? Have you seen what the lad has done?' snapped Albert, still trying to reach the edge of the ring.
   Death raised his skull and sniffed the air.
   The sound cut through all the other noises in the hall and forced them into silence.
   It was the kind of noise that is heard on the twilight edges of dreams, the sort that you wake from in a cold sweat of mortal horror. It was the snuffling under the door of dread. It was like the snuffling of a hedgehog, but if so then it was the kind of hedgehog that crashes out of the verges and flattens lorries. It was the kind of noise you wouldn't want to hear twice; you wouldn't want to hear itonce.
   Death straightened up slowly.
   IS THIS HOW HE REPAYS MY KINDNESS? TO STEAL MY DAUGHTER, INSULT MY SERVANTS, AND RISK THE FABRIC OF REALITY ON A PERSONAL WHIM? OH, FOOLISH, FOOLISH, I HAVE BEEN FOOLISH TOO LONG!
   'Master, if you would just be so good as to let go of my robe—' began Albert, and the wizard noticed a pleading edge to his voice that hadn't been there before.
   Death ignored him. He snapped his fingers like a castanet and the apron around his waist exploded into brief flames. The kitten, however, he put down very carefully and gently pushed away with his foot.
   DID I NOT GIVE HIM THE GREATEST OPPORTUNITY?
   'Exactly, master, and now if you could see your way clear—'
   SKILLS? A CAREER STRUCTURE? PROSPECTS? A JOB OR LIFE?
   'Indeed, and if you would but let go—'
   The change in Albert's voice was complete. The trumpets of command had become the piccolos of supplication. He sounded terrified, in fact, but he Managed to catch Rincewind's eye and hiss:
   'My staff! Throw me my staff! While he is in the circle he is not invincible! Let me have my staff and I can break free!'
   Rincewind said: 'Pardon?'
   OH, MINE IS THE FAULT FOR GIVING IN TO THESE WEAKNESSES OF WHAT FOR WANT OF A BETTER WORD I SHALL CALL THE FLESH!
   'My staff, you idiot, my staff!' gibbered Albert. 'Sorry?'
   WELL DONE, MY SERVANT, FOR CALLING ME TO MY SENSES. said Death. LET US LOSE NO TIME.
   'My sta-!'
   There was an implosion and an inrush of air.
   The candle flames stretched out like lines of fire for a moment, and then went out.
   Some time passed.
   Then the bursar's voice from somewhere near the floor said, 'That was very unkind, Rincewind, losing his staff like that. Remind me to discipline you severely one of these days. Anyone got a light?'
   'I don't know what happened to it! I just leaned it against the pillar here and now it's—'
   'Oook.'
   'Oh,' said Rincewind.
   'Extra banana ration, that ape,' said the bursar levelly. A match flared and someone managed to get a candle alight. Wizards started to pick themselves off the floor.
   'Well, that was a lesson to all of us,' the bursar continued, brushing dust and candlewax off his robe. He looked up, expecting to see the statue of Alberto Malich back on its pedestal.
   'Clearly even statues have feelings,' he said. 'I myself recall, when I was but a first-year student, writing my name on his well, never mind. The point is, I propose here and now we replace the statue.'
   Dead silence greeted this suggestion.
   'With, say, an exact likeness cast in gold. Suitably embellished with jewels, as befits our great founder,' he went on brightly.
   'And to make sure no students deface it in any way I suggest we then erect it in the deepest cellar,' he continued.
   'And then lock the door,' he added. Several wizards began to cheer up.
   'And throw away the key?' said Rincewind.
   'And weld the door,' the bursar said. He had just remembered about The Mended Drum. He thought for a while and remembered about the physical fitness regime as well.
   'And then brick up the doorway,' he said. There was a round of applause.
   'And throw away the bricklayer!' chortled Rincewind, who felt he was getting the hang of this.
   The bursar scowled at him. 'No need to get carried away,' he said.
   In the silence a larger than usual sand dune humped up awkwardly and then fell away to reveal Binky, blowing the sand out of his nostrils and shaking his mane.
   Mort opened his eyes.
   There should be a word for that brief period just after waking when the mind is full of warm pink nothing. You lie there entirely empty of thought, except for a growing suspicion that heading towards you, like a sockful of damp sand in a nocturnal alleyway, are all the recollections you'd really rather do without, and which amount to the fact that the only mitigating factor in your horrible future is the certainty that it will be quite short.
   Mort sat up and put his hands on top of his head to stop it unscrewing.
   The sand beside him heaved and Ysabell pushed herself into a sitting position. Her hair was full of sand and her face was grimy with pyramid dust. Some of her hair had frizzled at the tips. She stared listlessly at him.
   'Did you hit me?' he said, gently testing his jaw.
   'Yes.'
   'Oh.'
   He looked at the sky, as though it could remind him about things. He had to be somewhere, soon, he recalled. Then he remembered something else.
   Thank you,' he said.
   'Any time, I assure you.' Ysabell made it to her feet and tried to brush the dirt and cobwebs off her dress.
   'Are we going to rescue this princess of yours?' she said diffidently.
   Mort's own personal, internal reality caught up with him. He shot to his feet with a strangled cry, watched blue fireworks explode in front of his eyes, and collapsed again. Ysabell caught him under the shoulders and hauled him back on his feet.
   'Let's go down to the river,' she said. 'I think we could all do with a drink.'
   'What happened to me?'
   She shrugged as best she could while supporting his weight.
   'Someone used the Rite of AshkEnte. Father hates it, he says they always summon him at inconvenient moments. The part of you that was Death went and you stayed behind. I think. At least you've got your own voice back.'
   'What time is it?'
   'What time did you say the priests close up the pyramid?'
   Mort squinted through streaming eyes back towards the tomb of the king. Sure enough, torchlit fingers were working on the door. Soon, according to the legend, the guardians would come to life and begin their endless patrol.
   Heknew they would. He remembered the knowledge. He remembered his mind feeling as cold as ice and limitless as the night sky. He remembered being summoned into reluctant existence at the moment the first creature lived, in the certain knowledge that he would outlive life until the last being in the universe passed to its reward, when it would then be his job, figuratively speaking, to put the chairs on the tables and turn aU the lights off.
   He remembered the loneliness.
   'Don't leave me,' he said urgently.
   'I'm here,' she said. 'For as long as you need me.'
   'It's midnight,' he said dully, sinking down by the Tsort and lowering his aching head to the water. Beside him there was a noise like a bath emptying as Binky also took a drink.
   'Does that mean we're too late?'
   'Yes.'
   'I'm sorry. I wish there was something I could do.'
   There isn't.'
   'At least you kept your promise to Albert.'
   'Yes,' said Mort, bitterly. 'At least I did that.'
   Nearly all the way from one side of the Disc to the other. . . .
   There should be a word for the microscopic spark of hope that you dare not entertain in case the mere act of acknowledging it will cause it to vanish, like trying to look at a photon. You can only sidle up to it, looking past it,walking past it, waiting for it to get big enough to face the world.
   He raised his dripping head and looked towards the sunset horizon, trying to remember the big model of the Disc in Death's study without actually letting the universe know what he was entertaining.
   At times like this it can seem that eventuality is so finely balanced that merely thinking too loud can spoil everything.
   He orientated himself by the thin streamers of Hublight dancing against the stars, and made an inspired guess that Sto Lat was . . . over there. . . .
   'Midnight,' he said aloud.
   'Gone midnight now,' said Ysabell.
   Mort stood up, trying not to let the delight radiate out from him like a beacon, and grabbed Binky's harness.
   'Come on,' he said. 'We haven't got much time.'
   'What are you talking about?'
   Mort reached down to swing her up behind him. It was a nice idea, but merely meant that he nearly pulled himself out of the saddle. She pushed him back gently and climbed up by herself. Binky skittered sideways, sensing Mort's feverish excitement, and snorted and pawed at the sand.
   'I said, what are you talking about?'
   Mort turned the horse to face the distant glow of the sunset.
   'The speed of night,' he said.
   Cutwell poked his head over the palace battlements and groaned. The interface was only a street away, clearly visible in the octarine, and he didn't have to imagine the sizzling. He could hear it– a nasty, saw-toothed buzz as random particles of possibility hit the interface and gave up their energy as noise. As it ground its way up the street the pearly wall swallowed the bunting, the torches and the waiting crowds, leaving only dark streets. Somewhere out there, Cutwell thought, I'm fast asleep in my bed and none of this has happened. Lucky me.
   He ducked down, skidded down the ladder to the cobbles and legged it back to the main hall with the skirts of his robe flapping around his ankles. He slipped in through the small postern in the great door and ordered the guards to lock it, then grabbed his skirts again and pounded along a side passage so that the guests wouldn't notice him.
   The hall was lit with thousands of candles and crowded with Sto Plain dignitaries, nearly all of them slightly unsure why they were there. And, of course, there was the elephant.
   It was the elephant that had convinced Cutwell that he had gone off the rails of sanity, but it seemed like a good idea a few hours ago, when his exasperation at the High Priest's poor eyesight had run into the recollection that a lumber mill on the edge of town possessed said beast for the purposes of heavy haulage. It was elderly, arthritic and had an uncertain temper, but it had one important advantage as a sacrificial victim. The High Priest should be able to see it.
   Half a dozen guards were gingerly trying to restrain the creature, in whose slow brain the realization had dawned that it should be in its familiar stable, with plenty of hay and water and time to dream of the hot days on the great khaki plains of Klatch. It was getting restless.
   It will shortly become apparent that another reason for its growing friskiness is the fact that, in the pre-ceremony confusion, its trunk found the ceremonial chalice containing a gallon of strong wine and drained the lot. Strange hot ideas are beginning to bubble in front of its crusted eyes, of uprooted baobabs, mating fights with other bulls, glorious stampedes through native villages and other half-remembered pleasures. Soon it will start to see pink people.
   Fortunately this was unknown to Cutwell, who caught the eye of the High Priest's assistant– a forward-looking young man who had the foresight to provide himself with a long rubber apron and waders – and signalled that the ceremony should begin.
   He darted back into the priest's robing room and struggled into the special ceremonial robe the palace seamstress had made up for him, digging deep into her workbasket for scraps of lace, equins and gold thread to produce a garment of uch dazzling tastelessness that even the ArchChancellor of Unseen University wouldn't have been ashamed to wear it. Cutwell allowed himself five seconds to admire himself in the mirror before ramming the pointy hat on his head and running back to the door, stopping just in time to emerge at a sedate pace as befitted a person of substance.
   He reached the High Priest as Keli started her advance up the central aisle, flanked by maidservants who fussed around her like tugs around a liner.
   Despite the drawbacks of the hereditary dress, Cutwell thought she looked beautiful. There was something about her that made him—
   He gritted his teeth and tried to concentrate on the security arrangements. He had put guards at various vantage points in the hall in case the Duke of Sto Helit tried any last-minute rearrangement of the royal succession, and reminded himself to keep a special eye on the duke himself, who was sitting in the front row of seats with a strange quiet smile on his face. The duke caught Cutwell's eye, and the wizard hastily looked away.
   The High Priest held up his hands for silence. Cutwell sidled towards him as the old man turned towards the Hub and in a cracked voice began the invocation to the gods.
   Cutwell let his eyes slip back towards the duke.
   'Hear me, mm, O gods—'
   Was Sto Helit looking up into the bat-haunted darkness of the rafters?
   '— hear me, O Blind Io of the Hundred Eyes; hear me, O Great Offler of the Bird-Haunted Mouth: hear me, O Merciful Fate; hear me, O Cold, mm. Destiny; hear me, O Seven-handed Sek; hear me, O Hoki of the Woods; hear me, O —'
   With dull horror Cutwell realized that the daft old fool, against all instruction, was going to mention the whole lot. There were more than nine hundred known gods on the Disc, and research theologians were discovering more every year. It could take hours. The congregation was already beginning to shuffle its feet.
   Keli was standing in front of the altar with a look of fury on her face. Cutwell nudged the High Priest in the ribs, which had no noticeable effect, and then waggled his eyebrows ferociously at the young acolyte.
   'Stop him!' he hissed. 'We haven't got time!'
   The gods would be displeased—'
   'Not as displeased as me, and I'mhere.'
   The acolyte looked at Cutwell's expression for a moment and decided that he'd better explain to the gods later. He tapped the High Priest on the shoulder and whispered something in his ear.
   '— O Steikhegel, god of, mm, isolated cow byres; hear me, O – hello? What?'
   Murmur, murmur.
   This is, mm, very irregular. Very well, we shall go straight to the, mm, Recitation of the Lineage.'
   Murmur, murmur.
   The High Priest scowled at Cutwell, or at least where he believed Cutwell to be.
   'Oh, all right. Mm, prepare the incense and fragrances for the Shriving of the Fourfold-Path.'
   Murmur, murmur.
   The High Priest's face darkened.
   'I suppose, mm, a short prayer, mm, is totally out of the question?' he said acidly.
   'If some people don't get a move on,' said Keli demurely, 'there is going to be trouble.'
   Murmur.
   'I don't know, I'm sure,' said the High Priest. 'People might as well not bother with a religious, mm, ceremony at all. Fetch the bloody elephant, then.'
   The acolyte gave Cutwell a frantic look and waved at the guards. As they urged their gently-swaying charge forward with shouts and pointed sticks the young priest sidled towards Cutwell and pushed something into his hand.
   He looked down. It was a waterproof hat.
   'Is this necessary?'
   'He's very devout,' said the acolyte. 'We may need a snorkel.'
   The elephant reached the altar and was forced, without too much difficulty, to kneel. It hiccupped.
   'Well, where is it, then?' snapped the High Priest. 'Let's get this, mm,farce over with!'
   Murmur went the acolyte. The High Priest listened, nodded gravely, picked up his white-handled sacrificial knife and raised it double-handed over his head. The whole hall watched, holding its breath. Then he lowered it again.
   'Where in front of me?'
   Murmur.
   'I certainly don't need your help, my lad! I've been sacrificing man and boy– and, mm, women and animals – for seventy years, and when I can't use the, mm, knife you can put me to bed with a shovel!'
   And he brought the blade down in a wild sweep which, by sheer luck, gave the elephant a mild flesh wound on the trunk.
   The creature awoke from its pleasant reflective stupor and squealed. The acolyte turned in horror to look at two tiny bloodshot eyes squinting down the length of an enraged trunk, and cleared the altar in one standing jump.
   The elephant was enraged. Vague confusing recollections flooded its aching head, of fires and shouts and men with nets and cages and spears and too many years hauling heavy tree trunks. It brought its trunk down across the altar stone and somewhat to its own surprise smashed it in two, levered the two parts into the air with its tusks, tried unsuccessfully to uproot a stone pillar and then, feeling the sudden need for a breath of fresh air, started to charge arthritically down the length of the hall.
   It hit the door at a dead run, its blood loud with the call of the herd and fizzing with alcohol, and took it off at the hinges. Still wearing the frame on its shoulders it careened across the courtyard, smashed the outer gates, burped, thundered through the sleeping city and was still slowly accelerating when it sniffed the distant dark continent of Klatch on the night breeze and, tail raised, followed the ancient call of home.
   Back in the hall there was dust and shouts and confusion. Cutwell pushed his hat out of his eyes and got to his hands and knees.
   'Thank you,' said Keli, who had been lying underneath him. 'And why did you jump on top of me?'
   'My first instinct was to protect you, your Majesty.'
   'Yes, instinct it may have been, but—' She started to say that maybe the elephant would have weighed less, but the sight of his big, serious and rather flushed face stopped her.
   'We will talk about this later,' she said, sitting up and brushing the dust off her. 'In the meantime, I think we will dispense with the sacrifice. I'm not your Majesty yet, just your Highness, and now if someone will fetch the crown—'
   There was the snick of a safety catch behind them.
   'The wizard will put his hands where I can see them,' said the duke.
   Cutwell stood up slowly, and turned around. The duke was backed by half a dozen large serious men, the type of men whose only function in life is to loom behind people like the duke. They had a dozen large serious crossbows, whose main purpose was to appear to be on the point of going off.
   The princess sprang to her feet and launched herself at her uncle, but Cutwell grabbed her.
   'No,' he said, quietly. "This isn't the kind of man who ties you up in a cellar with just enough time for the mice to eat your ropes before the flood-waters rise. This is the kind of man who just kills you here and now.'
   The duke bowed.
   'I think it can be truly said that the gods have spoken,' he said. 'Clearly the princess was tragically crushed by the rogue elephant. The people will be upset. I will personally decree a week of mourning.'
   'You can't do that, all the guests have seen– !' the princess began, nearly in tears.
   Cutwell shook his head. He could see the guards moving through the crowds of bewildered guests.
   They haven't,' he said. 'You'll be amazed at what they haven't seen. Especially when they learn that being tragically crushed to death by rogue elephants can be catching. You can even die of it in bed.'
   The duke laughed pleasantly.
   'You really are quite intelligent for a wizard,' he said. 'Now, I am merely proposing banishment—'
   'You won't get away with this,' said Cutwell. He thought for a bit, and added, 'Well, you will probably get away with it, but you'll feel bad about it on your deathbed and you'll wish—'
   He stopped talking. His jaw dropped.
   The duke half turned to follow his gaze.
   'Well, wizard? What have you seen?'
   'You won't get away with it,' said Cutwell hysterically. 'You won't even be here. This is going to have never happened, do you realize?'
   'Watch his hands,' said the duke. 'If he even moves his fingers, shoot them.'
   He looked around again, puzzled. The wizard had sounded genuine. Of course, it was said wizards could see things that weren't there...
   'It doesn't even matter if you kill me,' Cutwell babbled, 'because tomorrow I'll wake up in my own bed and this won't have happened anyway. It's come through the wall!'
   Night rolled onwards across the Disc. It was always there, of course, lurking in shadows and holes and cellars, but as the slow light of day drifted after the sun the pools and lakes of night spread out, met and merged. Light on the Discworld moves slowly because of the vast magical field.
   Light on the Discworld isn't like light elsewhere. It's grown up a bit, it's been around, it doesn't feel the need to rush everywhere. It knows that however fast it goes darkness always gets there first, so it takes it easy.
   Midnight glided across the landscape like a velvet bat. And faster than midnight, a tiny spark against the dark world of the Disc, Binky pounded after it. Flames roared back from his hooves. Muscles moved under his glistening skin like snakes in oil.
   They moved in silence. Ysabell took one arm from around Mort's waist and watched sparks glitter around her fingers in all eight colours of the rainbow. Little crackling serpents of light flowed down her arm and flashed off the tips of her hair.
   Mort took the horse down lower, leaving a boiling wake of cloud that extended for miles behind them.
   'Now I know I'm going mad,' he muttered.
   'Why?'
   'I just saw an elephant down there. Whoa, boy. Look, you can see Sto Lat up ahead.'
   Ysabell peered over his shoulder at the distant gleam of light.
   'How long have we got?' she said nervously.
   'I don't know. A few minutes, perhaps.'
   'Mort, I hadn't asked you before—'
   'Well?'
   'What are you going todo when we get there?'
   'I don't know,' he said. 'I was sort of hoping something would suggest itself at the time.'
   'Has it?'
   'No. But it isn't time yet. Albert's spell may help. And I—'
   The dome of reality squatted over the palace like a collapsing jellyfish. Mort's voice trailed into horrified silence. Then Ysabell said, 'Well, I think it'snearly time. What are we going to do?'
   'Hold tight!'
   Binky glided through the smashed gates of the outer courtyard, slid across the cobbles in a trail of sparks and leapt through the ravaged doorway of the hall. The pearly wall of the interface loomed up and passed like a shock of cold spray.
   Mort had a confused vision of Keli and Cutwell and a group of large men diving for their lives. He recognized the features of the duke and drew his sword, vaulting from the saddle as soon as the steaming horse skidded to a halt.
   'Don't you lay a finger on her!' he screamed. 'I'll have your head off!'
   'This is certainly most impressive,' said the duke, drawing his own sword. 'And also very foolish. I—'
   He stopped. His eyes glazed over. He toppled forward. Cutwell put down the big silver candlestick he'd wielded and gave Mort an apologetic smile.
   Mort turned towards the guards, the blue flame of Death's sword humming through the air.
   'Anyone else want some?' he snarled. They backed away, and then turned and ran. As they passed through the interface they vanished. There were no guests outside there, either. In the real reality the hall was dark and empty.
   The four of them were left in a hemisphere that was rapidly growing smaller.
   Mort sidled over to Cutwell.
   'Any ideas?' he said. 'I've got a magic spell here somewhere—'
   'Forget it. If I try any magic in here now it'll blow our heads off. This little reality is too small to contain it.'
   Mort sagged against the remains of the altar. He felt empty, drained. For a moment he watched the sizzling wall of the interface drifting nearer. He'd survive it, he hoped, and so would Ysabell. Cutwell wouldn't, but a Cutwell would. Only Keli—
   'Am I going to be crowned or not?' she said icily. 'I've got to die a queen! It'd be terrible to be deadand common!'
   Mort gave her an unfocused look, trying to remember what on earth she was talking about. Ysabell fished around in the wreckage behind the altar, and came up with a rather battered gold circlet set with small diamonds.
   'Is this it?' she said.
   That's the crown,' said Keli, nearly in tears. 'But there's no priest or anything.'
   Mort sighed deeply.
   'Cutwell, if this is our own reality we can rearrange it the way we want, can't we?'
   'What had you in mind?'
   'You're now a priest. Name your own god.'
   Cutwell curtsied, and took the crown from Ysabell.
   'You're all making fun of me!' snapped Keli.
   'Sorry,' said Mort, wearily. 'It's been rather a long day.'
   'I hope I can do this right,' said Cutwell solemnly. 'I've never crowned anyone before.'
   'I've never been crowned before!'
   'Good,' said Cutwell soothingly. 'We can learn together.' He started to mutter some impressive words in a strange tongue. It was in fact a simple spell for ridding the clothing of fleas, but he thought, what the hell. And then he thought, gosh, in this reality I'm the most powerful wizard there ever was, that'd be something to tell my grandch . . . He gritted his teeth. There'd be some rules changed in this reality, that was for sure.
   Ysabell sat down beside Mort and slipped her hand in his.
   'Well?' she said quietly. This is the time. Has anything suggested itself?'
   'No.'
   The interface was more than halfway down the hall, slowing slightly as it relentlessly ground down the pressure of the intruding reality.
   Something wet and warm blew in Mort's ear. He reached up and touched Binky's muzzle.
   'Dear old horse,' he said. 'And I'm right out of sugar lumps. You'll have to find your way home by yourself—'
   His hand stopped in mid-pat.
   'We canall go home,' he said.
   'I don't think father would like that very much,' said Ysabell, but Mort ignored her.
   'Cutwell!'
   'Yes?'
   'We're leaving. Are you coming? You'll still exist when the interface closes.'
   'Part of me will,' said the wizard.
   'That's what I meant,' said Mort, swinging himself up on to Binky's back.
   'But speaking as the part that won't, I'd like to join you,' said Cutwell quickly.
   'I intend to stay here to die in my own kingdom,' said Keli.
   'What you intend doesn't signify,' said Mort. 'I've come all the way across the Disc to rescue you, d'you see, and you're going to be rescued.'
   'But I'm the queen!' said Keli. Uncertainty welled up in her eyes, and she spun round to Cutwell, who lowered his candle-stick guiltily. 'I heard you say the words! I am queen, aren't I?'
   'Oh, yes,' said Cutwell instantly; and then, because a wizard's word is supposed to be harder than cast iron, added virtuously, 'And totally free from infestation, too.'
   'Cutwell!' snapped Mort. The wizard nodded, caught Keli around the waist and bodily hoisted her on to Binky's back. Hoisting his skirts around his waist he clambered up behind Mort and reached down and swung Ysabell up behind him. The horse jigged across the floor, complaining about the overloading, but Mort turned him towards the broken doorway and urged him forward.
   The interface followed them as they clattered down the hall and into the courtyard, rising slowly. Its pearly fog was only yards away, tightening by inches.
   'Excuse me,' said Cutwell to Ysabell, raising his hat. 'Igneous Cutwell, Wizard Ist Grade (UU), former Royal Recognizer and soon to be beheaded probably. Would you happen to know where we are going?'
   To my father's country,' shouted Ysabell, above the wind of their passage.
   'Have I ever met him?'
   'I don't think so. You'd have remembered.'
   The top of the palace wall scraped Binky's hooves as, muscles straining, he sought for more height. Cutwell leaned backward again, holding on to his hat.
   'Who is this gentleman of which we speak?' he yelled.
   'Death,' said Ysabell.
   'Not—'
   'Yes.'
   'Oh.' Cutwell peered down at the distant rooftops, and gave her a lopsided smile. 'Would it save time if I just jumped off now?'
   'He's quite nice if you get to know him,' said Ysabell defensively.
   'Is he? Do you think we'll get the chance?'
   'Hold on!' said Mort. 'We should be going across just about—'
   A hole full of blackness rushed out of the sky and caught them.
   The interface bobbed uncertainly, empty as a pauper's pocket, and carried on shrinking.

   The front door opened. Ysabell poked her head out.
   'There's no one at home,' she said. 'You'd better come in.'
   The other three filed into the hallway. Cutwell conscientiously wiped his feet.
   'It's a bit small,' said Keli, critically.
   'It's a lot bigger inside,' said Mort, and turned to Ysabell. 'Have you looked everywhere?'
   'I can't even find Albert,' she said. 'I can't remember him ever not being here.'
   She coughed, remembering her duties as hostess.
   'Would anyone like a drink?' she said. Keli ignored her.
   'I was expecting a castle at least,' she said. 'Big and black, with great dark towers. Not an umbrella stand.'
   'It has got a scythe in it,' Cutwell pointed out.
   'Let's all go into the study and sit down and I'm sure we'll all feel better,' said Ysabell hurriedly, and pushed open the black baize door.
   Cutwell and Keli stepped through, bickering. Ysabell took Mort's arm.
   'What are we going to do now?' she said. 'Father will be very angry if he finds them here.'
   'I'll think of something,' said Mort. 'I'll rewrite the autobiographies or something.' He smiled weakly. 'Don't worry. I'll think of something.'
   The door slammed behind him. Mort turned to look into Albert's grinning face.
   The big leather armchair behind the desk revolved slowly. Death looked at Mort over steepled fingers. When he was quite certain he had their full, horrified attention, he said:
   YOU HAD BETTER START NOW.
   He stood up, appearing to grow larger as the room darkened.
   DON'T BOTHER TO APOLOGISE, he added. Keli buried her head in Cutwell's ample chest.
   I AMBACK. AND I AMANGRY.
   'Master, I—' Mort began.
   SHUT UP, said Death. He beckoned Keli with a calcareous forefinger. She turned to look at him, her body not daring to disobey.
   Death reached out and touched her chin. Mort's hand went to his sword.
   IS THIS THE FACE THAT LAUNCHED A THOUSAND SHIPS, AND BURNED THE TOPLESS TOWERS OF PSEUDOPOLIS? wondered Death. Keli stared hypnotised at the red pinpoints miles deep in those dark sockets.
   'Er, excuse me,' said Cutwell, holding his hat respectfully, Mexican fashion.
   WELL? said Death, distracted.
   'It isn't, sir. You must be thinking about another face.'
   WHAT IS YOUR NAME?
   'Cutwell, sir. I'm a wizard, sir.'
   I'M A WIZARD, SIR, Death sneered. BE SILENT, WIZARD.
   'Sir.' Cutwell stepped back.
   Death turned to Ysabell.
   DAUGHTER, EXPLAIN YOURSELF. WHY DID YOU AID THIS FOOL?
   Ysabell curtsied nervously.
   'I– love him, father. I think.'
   'You do?' said Mort, astonished. 'You never said!'
   There didn't seem to be time,' said Ysabell. 'Father, he didn't mean—'
   BE SILENT.
   Ysabell dropped her gaze. 'Yes, father.'
   Death stalked around the desk until he was standing directly in front of Mort. He stared at him for a long time.
   Then in one blurred movement his hand struck Mort across the face, knocking him off his feet.
   I INVITE YOU INTO MY HOME, he said, I TRAIN YOU, I FEED YOU, I CLOTHE YOU, I GIVE YOU OPPORTUNITIES YOU COULD NOT DREAM OF, AND THUS YOU REPAY ME. YOU SEDUCE MY DAUGHTER FROM ME, YOU NEGLECT THE DUTY, YOU MAKE RIPPLES IN REALITY THAT WILL TAKE A CENTURY TO HEAL. YOUR ILL-TIMED ACTIONS HAVE DOOMED YOUR COMRADES TO OBLIVION. THE GODS WILL DEMAND NOTHING LESS.
   ALL IN ALL, BOY, NOT A GOOD START TO YOUR FIRST JOB.
   Mort struggled into a sitting position, holding his cheek. It burned coldly, like comet ice.
   'Mort,' he said.
   IT SPEAKS! WHAT DOES IT SAY?
   'You could let them go,' said Mort. They just got involved. It wasn't their fault. You could rearrange this so—'
   WHY SHOULD I DO THAT? THEY BELONG TO ME NOW.
   'I'll fight you for them,' said Mort.
   VERY NOBLE. MORTALS FIGHT ME ALL THE TIME. YOU ARE DISMISSED.
   Mort got to his feet. He remembered what being Death had been like. He caught hold of the feeling, let it surface. . . .
   NO, he said.
   AH. YOU CHALLENGE ME AS BETWEEN EQUALS, THEN?
   Mort swallowed. But at least the way was clear now. When you step off a cliff, your life takes a very definite direction.
   'If necessary,' he said. 'And if I win—'
   IF YOU WIN, YOU WILL BE IN A POSITION TO DO WHATEVER YOU PLEASE, said Death. FOLLOW ME.
   He stalked past Mort and out into the hall.
   The other four looked at Mort.
   'Are you sure you know what you're doing?' said Cutwell.
   'No.'
   'You can't beat the master,' said Albert. He sighed. 'Take it from me.'
   'What will happen if you lose?' said Keli.
   'I won't lose,' said Mort. 'That's the trouble.'
   'Father wants him to win,' said Ysabell bitterly.
   'You mean he'll let Mort win?' said Cutwell.
   'Oh, no, he won'tlet him win. He just wants him to win.'
   Mort nodded. As they followed Death's dark shape he reflected on an endless future, serving whatever mysterious purpose the Creator had in mind, living outside Time. He couldn't blame Death for wanting to quit the job. Death had said the bones were not compulsory, but perhaps that wouldn't matter. Would eternity feel like a long time, or were all lives– from a personal viewpoint – entirely the same length?
   Hi, said a voice in his head. Remember me? I'm you. I got you into this.
   'Thanks,' he said bitterly. The others glanced at him.
   You could come through this, the voice said. You've got a big advantage. You've been him, and he's never been you.
   Death swept through the hall and into the Long Room, the candles obediently flicking into flame as he entered.
   ALBERT.
   'Master?'
   FETCH THE GLASSES.
   'Master.'
   Cutwell grabbed the old man's arm.
   'You're a wizard,' he hissed. 'You don't have to do what he says!'
   'How old are you, lad?' said Albert, kindly.
   'Twenty.'
   'When you're my age you'll see your choices differently.' He turned to Mort. 'Sorry.'
   Mort drew his sword, its blade almost invisible in the light from the candles. Death turned and stood facing him, a thin silhouette against a towering rack of hourglasses.
   He held out his arms. The scythe appeared in them with a tiny thunderclap.
   Albert came back down one of the glass-lined alleys with two hourglasses, and set them down wordlessly on a ledge on one of the pillars.
   One was several times the size of the ordinary glasses– black, thin and decorated with a complicated skull-and-bones motif.
   That wasn't the most unpleasant thing about it.
   Mort groaned inwardly. He couldn't see any sand in there.
   The smaller glass beside it was quite plain and unadorned. Mort reached for it.
   'May I?' he said.
   BE MY GUEST.
   The name Mort was engraved on the top bulb. He held it up to the light, noting without any real surprise that there was hardly any sand left. When he held it to his ear he thought he could hear, even above the ever-present roar of the millions of lifetimers around him, the sound of his own life pouring away.
   He put it down very carefully.
   Death turned to Cutwell.
   MR WIZARD, SIR, YOU WILL BE GOOD ENOUGH TO GIVE US A COUNT OF THREE.
   Cutwell nodded glumly.
   'Are you sure this couldn't all be sorted out by getting around a table—' he began.
   NO.
   'No.'
   Mort and Death circled one another warily, their reflections flickering across the banks of hourglasses.
   'One,'said Cutwell.
   Death spun his scythe menacingly.
   'Two.'
   The blades met in mid-air with a noise like a cat sliding down a pane of glass.
   'They both cheated!' said Keli. Ysabell nodded. 'Of course,' she said.
   Mort jumped back, bringing the sword round in a too-slow arc that Death easily deflected, turning the parry into a wicked low sweep that Mort avoided only by a clumsy standing jump.
   Although the scythe isn't preeminent among weapons of war, anyone who has been on the wrong end of, say, a peasants' revolt will know that in skilled hands it is fearsome. Once its owner gets it weaving and spinning no one– including the wielder – is quite certain where the blade is now and where it will be next.
   Death advanced, grinning. Mort ducked a cut at head height and dived sideways, hearing a tinkle behind him as the tip of the scythe caught a glass on the nearest shelf. . . .
   ... in a dark alley in Morpork a night soil entrepreneur clutched at his chest and pitched forward over his cart. . . .
   Mort rolled and came up swinging the sword double-handed over his head, feeling a twang of dark exhilaration as Death darted backwards across the checkered tiles. The wild swing cut through a shelf; one after another its burden of glasses started to slide towards the floor. Mort was dimly aware of Ysabell scurrying past him to catch them one by one. . . .
   ... across the Disc four people miraculously escaped death by falling. . . .
   ... and then he ran forward, pressing home his advantage. Death's hands moved in a blur as he blocked every chop and thrust, and then changed grip on the scythe and brought the blade swinging up in an arc that Mort sidestepped awkwardly, nicking the frame of an hourglass with the hilt of his sword and sending it flying across the room. . . .
   ... in the Ramtop mountains a tharga-herder, searching by lamplight in the high meadows for a lost cow, missed his footing and plunged over a thousand foot drop. . . .
   ... Gutwell dived forward and caught the tumbling glass in one desperately outstretched hand, hit the floor and slid along on his stomach. . . .
   ... a gnarled sycamore mysteriously loomed under the screaming herder and broke his fall, removing his major problems– death, the judgement of the gods, the uncertainty of Paradise and so on – and replacing them with the comparatively simple one of climbing back up about one hundred feet of sheer, icy cliff in pitch darkness.
   There was a pause as the combatants backed away from each other and circled again, looking for an opening.
   'Surely there's something we can do?' said Keli.
   'Mort will lose either way,' said Ysabell, shaking her head. Cutwell shook the silver candlestick out of his baggy sleeve and tossed it thoughtfully from hand to hand.
   Death hefted the scythe threateningly, incidentally smashing an hourglass by his shoulder. . . .
   ... in Bes Pelargic the Emperor's chief torturer slumped backwards into his own acid pit. . . .
   ... and took another swing which Mort dodged by sheer luck. But only just. He could feel the hot ache in his muscles and the numbing greyness of fatigue poisons in his brain, two disadvantages that Death did not have to consider.
   Death noticed.
   YIELD, he said. I MAY BE MERCIFUL.
   To illustrate the point he made a roundarm slash that Mort caught, clumsily, on the edge of his sword. The scythe blade bounced up, splintered a glass into a thousand shards. . . .
   ... the Duke of Sto Helit clutched at his heart, felt the icy stab of pain, screamed soundlessly and tumbled from his horse. . . .
   Mort backed away until he felt the roughness of a stone pillar on his neck. Death's glass with its dauntingly empty bulbs was a few inches from his head.
   Death himself wasn't paying much attention. He was looking down thoughtfully at the jagged remains of the Duke's life.
   Mort yelled and swung his sword up, to the faint cheers of the crowd that had been waiting for him to do this for some time. Even Albert clapped his wrinkled hands.
   But instead of. the tinkle of glass that Mort had expected there was– nothing.
   He turned and tried again. The blade passed right through the glass without breaking it.
   The change in the texture of the air made him bring the sword around and back in time to deflect a vicious downward sweep. Death sprang away in time to dodge Mort's counter thrust, which was slow and weak.
   THUS IT ENDS, BOY.
   'Mort,' said Mort. He looked up.
   'Mort,' he repeated, and brought the sword up in a stroke that cut the scythe's handle in two. Anger bubbled up inside him. If he was going to die, then at least he'd die with the right name.
   'Mort, you bastard!' he screamed, and propelled himself straight towards the grinning skull with the sword whirring in a complicated dance of blue light. Death staggered backwards, laughing, crouching under the rain of furious strokes that sliced the scythe handle into more pieces.
   Mort circled him, chopping and thrusting and dully aware, even through the red mists of fury, that Death was following his every move, holding the orphaned scytheblade like a sword. There was no opening, and the motor of his anger wouldn't last. You'll never beat him, he told himself. The best we can do is hold him off for a while. And losing is probably better than winning. Who needs eternity, anyway?
   Through the curtain of his fatigue he saw Death unfold the length of his bones and bring his blade round in a slow, leisurely arc as though it was moving through treacle.
   'Father!' screamed Ysabell.
   Death turned his head.
   Perhaps Mort's mind welcomed the prospect of the life to come but his body, which maybe felt it had most to lose in the deal, objected. It brought his sword arm up in one unstoppable stroke that flicked Death's blade from his hand, and then pinned him against the nearest pillar.
   In the sudden hush Mort realized he could no longer hear an intrusive little noise that had been just at his threshold of hearing for the last ten minutes. His eyes darted sideways.
   The last of his sand was running out.
   STRIKE.
   Mort raised the sword, and looked into the twin blue fires.
   He lowered the sword.
   'No.'
   Death's foot lashed out at groin height with a speed that even made Cutwell wince.
   Mort silently curled into a ball and rolled across the floor. Through his tears he saw Death advancing, scythe-blade in one hand and Mort's own hourglass in the other. He saw Keli and Ysabell swept disdainfully aside as they made a grab for the robe. He saw Cutwell elbowed in the ribs, his candlestick clattering across the tiles.
   Death stood over him. The tip of the blade hovered in front of Mort's eyes for a moment, and then swept upwards.
   'You're right. There's no justice. There's just you.'
   Death hesitated, and then slowly lowered the blade. He turned and looked down into Ysabell's face. She was shaking with anger.
   YOUR MEANING?
   She glowered up at Death's face and then her hand swung back and swung around and swung forward and connected with a sound like a dice box.
   It was nothing like as loud as the silence that followed it.
   Keli shut her eyes. Cutwell turned away and put his arms over his head.
   Death raised a hand to his skull, very slowly.
   Ysabell's chest rose and fell in a manner that should have made Cutwell give up magic for life.
   Finally, in a voice even more hollow than usual, Death said: WHY?
   'You said that to tinker with the fate of one individual could destroy the whole world,' said Ysabell.
   YES?
   'You meddled with his. And mine.' She pointed a trembling finger at the splinters of glass on the floor. 'And those, too.'
   WELL?
   'What will the gods demand forthat?'
   FROM ME?
   'Yes!'
   Death looked surprised. THE GODS CAN DEMAND NOTHING OFME. EVEN GODS ANSWER TO ME, EVENTUALLY.
   'Doesn't seem very fair, does it? Don't the gods bother about justice and mercy?' snapped Ysabell. Without anyone quite noticing she had picked up the sword.
   Death grinned. I APPLAUD YOUR EFFORTS, he said, BUT THEY AVAIL YOU NAUGHT. STAND ASIDE.
   'No.'
   YOU MUST BE AWARE THAT EVEN LOVE IS NO DEFENCE AGAINST ME. I AM SORRY.
   Ysabell raised the sword. 'You 're sorry?'
   STAND ASIDE, I SAY.
   'No. You're just being vindictive. It's not fair!'
   Death bowed his skull for a moment, then looked up with his eyes blazing.
   YOU WILL DO AS YOU ABE TOLD.
   'I will not.'
   YOU'RE MAKING THIS VERY DIFFICULT.
   'Good.'
   Death's fingers drummed impatiently on the scythe-blade, like a mouse tapdancing on a tin. He seemed to be thinking. He looked at Ysabell standing over Mort, and then turned and looked at the others crouching against a shelf.
   NO, he said eventually. NO. I CANNOT BE BIDDEN. I CANNOT BE FORCED. I WILL DO ONLY THAT WHICH I KNOW TO BE RIGHT.
   He waved a hand, and the sword whirred out of Ysabell's grasp. He made another complicated gesture and the girl herself was picked up and pressed gently but firmly against the nearest pillar.
   Mort saw the dark reaper advance on him again, blade swinging back for the final stroke. He stood over the boy.
   YOU DON'T KNOW HOW SORRY THIS MAKES ME, he aid.
   Mort pulled himself on to his elbows.
   'I might,' he said.
   Death gave him a surprised look for several seconds, and then started to laugh. The sound bounced eerily around the room, ringing off the shelves as Death, still laughing like an earthquake in a graveyard, held Mort's own glass in front of its owner's eyes.
   Mort tried to focus. He saw the last grain of sand skid down the glossy surface, teeter on the edge and then drop, tumbling in slow motion, towards the bottom. Candlelight flickered off its tiny silica facets as it spun gently downward. It landed soundlessly, throwing up a tiny crater.
   The light in Death's eyes flared until it filled Mort's vision and the sound of his laughter rattled the universe.
   And then Death turned the hourglass over.

   Once again the great hall of Sto Lat was brilliant with candlelight and loud with music.
   As the guests flocked down the steps and descended on the cold buffet the Master of Ceremonies was in non-stop voice, introducing those who, by reason of importance or simple absent-mindedness, had turned up late. As for example:
   The Royal Recognizer, Master of the Queen's Bedchamber, His Ipississumussness Igneous Cutwell, Wizard Ist Grade (UU).'
   Cutwell advanced on the regal couple, grinning, a large cigar in one hand.
   'May I kiss the bride?' he said.
   'If it's allowed for wizards,' said Ysabell, offering a cheek.
   'We thought the fireworks were marvellous,' said Mort. 'And I expect they'll soon be able to rebuild the outer wall. No doubt you'll be able to find your way to the food.'
   'He's looking a lot better these days,' said Ysabell behind her fixed grin, as Cutwell disappeared into the throng.
   'Certainly there's a lot to be said for being the only person who doesn't bother to obey the queen,' said Mort, exchanging nods with a passing nobleman.
   'They say he's the real power behind the throne,' said Ysabell. 'An eminence something.'
   'Eminence grease,' said Mort absently. 'Notice how he doesn't do any magic these days?'
   'Shut up here she comes.'
   'Her Supreme Majesty, Queen Kelirehenna I, Lord of Sto Lat, Protector of the Eight Protectorates and Empress of the Long Thin Debated Piece Hubwards of Sto Kerrig.'
   Ysabell bobbed. Mort bowed. Keli beamed at both of them. They couldn't help noticing that she had come under some influence that inclined her towards clothes that at least roughly followed her shape, and away from hairstyles that looked like the offspring of a pineapple and a candyfloss.
   She pecked Ysabell on the cheek and then stepped back and looked Mort up and down.
   'How's Sto Helit?' she said.
   'Fine, fine,' said Mort. 'We'll have to do something about the cellars, though. Your late uncle had some unusual– hobbies, and. . . .'
   'She means you,' whispered Ysabell. 'That's your official name.'
   'I preferred Mort,' said Mort.
   'Such an interesting coat of arms, too,' said the queen. 'Crossed scythes on an hourglass rampant against a sable field. It gave the Royal College quite a headache.'
   'It's not that I mind being a duke,' said Mort. 'Its being married to a duchess that comes as a shock.'
   'You'll get used to it.'
   'I hope not.'
   'Good. And now, Ysabell,' said Keli, setting her jaw, 'if you are to move in royal circles there are some people you simply must meet.
   Ysabell gave Mort a despairing look as she was swept away into the crowd, and was soon lost to view.
   Mort ran a finger around the inside of his collar, looked both ways, and then darted into a fern-shaded corner near the end of the buffet where he could have a quiet moment to himself.
   Behind him the Master of Ceremonies cleared his throat. His eyes took on a distant, glazed look.
   The Stealer of Souls,' he said in the faraway voice of one whose ears aren't hearing what his mouth is saying, 'Defeater of Empires, Swallower of Oceans, Thief of Years, The Ultimate Reality, Harvester of Mankind, the—'
   ALL RIGHT, ALL RIGHT. I CAN SEE MYSELF IN.
   Mort paused with a cold turkey leg halfway to his mouth. He didn't turn around. He didn't need to. There was no mistaking that voice, felt rather than heard, or the way in which the air chilled and darkened. The chatter and music of the wedding reception slowed and faded.
   'We didn't think you'd come,' he said to a potted fern.
   TO MY OWN DAUGHTER'S WEDDING? ANYWAY, IT WAS THE FIRST TIME I'VE EVER HAD AN INVITATION TO ANYTHING. IT HAD GOLD EDGES AND RSVP AND EVERYTHING.
   'Yes, but when you weren't at the service—'
   I THOUGHT PERHAPS IT WOULD NOT BE ENTIRELY APPROPRIATE.
   'Well, yes, I suppose so—'
   TO BE FRANK, I THOUGHT YOU WERE GOING TO MARRY THE PRINCESS.
   Mort blushed. 'We talked about it,' he said. 'Then we thought, just because you happen to rescue a princess, you shouldn't rush into things.'
   VERY WISE. TOO MANY YOUNG WOMEN LEAP INTO THE ARMS OF THE FIRST YOUNG MAN TO WAKE THEM AFTER A HUNDRED YEARS' SLEEP, FOR EXAMPLE.
   'And, well, we thought that all in all, well, once I really got to know Ysabell, well.
   YES, YES, I AM SURE. AN EXCELLENT DECISION. HOWEVER, I HAVE DECIDED NOT TO INTEREST MYSELF IN HUMAN AFFAIRS ANY FURTHER.
   Really?'
   EXCEPT OFFICIALLY, OF COURSE. IT WAS CLOUDING MY JUDGEMENT.
   A skeletal hand appeared on the edge of Mort's vision and skilfully speared a stuffed egg. Mort spun around.
   'What happened?' he said. 'I've got to know! One minute we were in the Long Room and the next we were in a field outside the city, and we were really us! I mean, reality had been altered to fit us in! Who did it?'
   I HAD A WORD WITH THE GODS. Death looked uncomfortable.
   'Oh. You did, did you?' said Mort. Death avoided his gaze.
   YES.
   'I shouldn't think they were very pleased.'
   THE GODS ARE JUST. THEY ARE ALSO SENTIMENTALISTS. I HAVE NEVER BEEN ABLE TO MASTER IT, MYSELF. BUT YOU AREN'T FREE YET. YOU MUST SEE TO IT THAT HISTORY TAKES PLACE.
   'I know,' said Mort. 'Uniting the kingdoms and everything.'
   YOU MIGHT END UP WISHING YOU'D STAYED WITH ME.
   'I certainly learned a lot,' Mort admitted. He put his hand up to his face and absent-mindedly stroked the four thin white scars across his cheek. 'But I don't think I was cut out for that sort of work. Look, I'm really sorry—'
   I HAVE A PRESENT FOR YOU.
   Death put down his plate of hors d'oeuvres and fumbled in the mysterious recesses of his robe. When his skeletal hand emerged it was holding a little globe between thumb and forefinger.
   It was about three inches across. It could have been the largest pearl in the world, except that the surface was a moving swirl of complicated silver shapes, forever on the point of resolving themselves into something recognizable but always managing to avoid it.
   When Death dropped it into Mort's outstretched palm it felt surprisingly heavy and slightly warm.
   FOR YOU AND YOUR LADY. A WEDDING PRESENT. A DOWRY.
   'It's beautiful! We thought the silver toast rack was from you.'
   THAT WAS ALBERT. I'M AFRAID HE DOESN'T HAVE MUCH IMAGINATION.
   Mort turned the globe over and over in his hands. The shapes boiling inside it seemed to respond to his touch, sending little streamers of light arching across the surface towards his fingers.
   'Is it a pearl?' he said.
   YES. WHEN SOMETHING IRRITATES AN OYSTER AND CAN'T BE REMOVED, THE POOR THING COATS IT WITH MUCUS AND TURNS IT INTO A PEARL. THIS IS A PEARL OF A DIFFERENT COLOUR. A PEARL OF REALITY. ALL THAT SHINY STUFF IS CONGEALED ACTUALITY. YOU OUGHT TO RECOGNIZE IT– YOU CREATED IT, AFTER ALL.
   Mort tossed it gently from hand to hand.
   'We will put it with the castle jewels,' he said. 'We haven't got that many.'
   ONE DAY IT WILL BE THE SEED OF A NEW UNIVERSE.
   Mort fumbled the catch, but reached down with lightning reflexes and caught it before it hit the flagstones.
   'What?'
   THE PRESSURE OFTHIS REALITY KEEPS IT COMPRESSED. THERE MAY COME A TIME WHEN THE UNIVERSE ENDS AND REALITY DIES, AND THEN THIS ONE WILL EXPLODE AND . . . WHO KNOWS? KEEP IT SAFE. IT'S A FUTURE AS WELL AS A PRESENT.
   Death put his skull on one side. IT'S A SMALL THING, he added. YouCOULD HAVE HAD ETERNITY.
   'I know,' said Mort. 'I've been very lucky.'
   He put it very carefully on the buffet table, between the quails' eggs and the sausage rolls.
   THERE WAS ANOTHER THING, said Death. He reached under his robe again and pulled out an oblong shape inexpertly wrapped and tied with string.
   IT'S FOR YOU, he said, PERSONALLY. YOU NEVER SHOWED ANY INTEREST IN IT BEFORE. DID YOU THINK IT DIDN'T EXIST?
   Mort unwrapped the packet and realized he was holding a small leather-bound book. On the spine was blocked, in shiny gold leaf, the one word:Mort.
   He leafed backwards through the unfilled pages until he found the little trail of ink, winding patiently down the page, and read:

   "Mort shut the book with a little snap that sounded, in the silence, like the crack of creation, and smiled uneasily.
   There's a lot of pages still to fill,' he said. 'How much sand have I got left? Only Ysabell said that since you turned the glass over that means I shall die when I'm—'
   YOU HAVE SUFFICIENT, said Death coldly. MATHEMATICS ISNT ALL IT'S CRACKED UP TO BE.
   'How do you feel about being invited to christenings?'
   I THINK NOT. I WASN'T CUT OUT TO BE A FATHER, AND CERTAINLY NOT A GRANDAD. I HAVEN'T GOT THE RIGHT KIND OF KNEES.
   He put down his wine glass and nodded at Mort.
   MY REGARDS TO YOUR GOOD LADY, he said. AND NOW I REALLY MUST BE OFF.
   'Are you sure? You're welcome to stay.'
   IT'S NICE OF YOU TO SAY SO, BUT DUTY CALLS. He extended a bony hand. YOU KNOW HOW IT IS.
   Mort gripped the hand and shook it, ignoring the chill.
   'Look,' he said. 'If ever you want a few days off, you know, if you'd like a holiday—'
   MANY THANKS FOR THE OFFER, said Death graciously. I SHALL THINK ABOUT IT MOST SERIOUSLY. AND NOW—
   'Goodbye,' Mart said, and was surprised to find a lump in his throat. 'It's such an unpleasant word, isn't it?'
   QUITE SO. Death grinned because, as has so often been remarked, he didn't have much option. But possibly he meant it, this time.
   I PREFER AU REVOIR, he said."


   Notes
   1
   Practically anything can go faster than Disc light, which is lazy and tame, unlike ordinary light. The only thing known to go faster than ordinary light is monarchy, according to the philosopher Ly Tin Wheedle. He reasoned like this: you can't have more than one king, and tradition demands that there is no gap between kings, so when a king dies the succession must therefore pass to the heir instantaneously. Presumably, he said, there must be some elementary particles– kingons, or possibly queons – that do this job, but of course succession sometimes fails if, in mid-flight, they strike an anti-particle, or republicon. His ambitious plans to use his discovery to send messages, involving the careful torturing of a small king in order to modulate the signal, were never fully expounded because, at that point, the bar closed.
   2
   The first pizza was created on the Disc by the Klatchian mystic Ronron 'Revelation Joe' Shuwadhi, who claimed to have been given the recipe in a dream by the Creator of the Discworld Himself, Who had apparently added that it was what He had intended all along. Those desert travellers who had seen the original, which is reputedly miraculously preserved in the Forbidden City of Ee, say that what the Creator had in mind then was a fairly small cheese and pepperoni affair with a few black olives* and things like mountains and seas got added out of last-minute enthusiasm, as so often happens.
   * After the Schism of the Turnwise Ones and the deaths of some 25,000 people in the ensuing jihad the faithful were allowed to add one small bayleaf to the recipe.
   3
   Although not the droopy moustache and round furry hat with the spike on it.
   4
   The speech has been passed on to later generations in an epic poem commissioned by his son, who wasn't born in a saddle and could eat with a knife and fork. It began:'See yonder the stolid foemen slumberFat with stolen gold, corrupt of mind.Let the spears of your wrath be as the steppe fire on awindy day in the dry season,Let your honest blade thrust like the horns ofa five-year old yok with severe toothache....'
   And went on for three hours. Reality, which can't usually afford to pay poets, records that in fact the entire speech ran: 'Lads, most of them are still in bed, we should go through them like kzak fruit through a short grandmother, and I for one have had it right up to here with yurts, okay?'
   5
   The Disc's greatest lovers were undoubtedly Mellius and Gretelina, whose pure, passionate and soul-searing affair would have scorched the pages of History if they had not, because of some unexplained quirk of fate, been born two hundred years apart on different continents. However, the gods took pity on them and turned him into an ironing board* and her into a small brass bollard.
   * When you're a god, you don't have to have reasons.
   6
   There had been half a jar of elderly mayonnaise, a piece of very old cheese, and a tomato with white mould growing on it. Since during the day the pantry of the palace of Sto Lat normally contained fifteen whole stags, one hundred brace of partridges, fifty hogsheads of butter, two hundred jugs of hares, seventy-five sides of beef, two miles of assorted sausages, various fowls, eighty dozen eggs, several Circle Sea sturgeon, a vat of caviar and an elephant's leg stuffed with olives, Cutwell had learned once again that one universal manifestation of raw, natural magic throughout the universe is this; that any domestic food store, raided furtively in the middle of the night, always contains, no matter what its daytime inventory, half a jar of elderly mayonnaise, a piece of very old cheese, and a tomato with white mould growing on it.
   7
   Ankh-Morpork had dallied with many forms of government and had ended up with that form of democracy known as One Man, One Vote. The Patrician was the Man; he had the Vote.